



The Art 
of  The  
Game of 
Chess

Edited and translated by 
Michael J. McGr ath
Foreword by andrew SoltiS
Grandmaster and United States Chess Hall 
of Fame Inductee

RUY LÓPEZ
The Art
of  The 
Game of
Chess
the catholic univerSity 
oF aMerica preSS
Washington, D.C.

Copyright © 2020
The Catholic University of America Press
All rights reserved
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum 
requirements of American National Standards for 
Information Science—Permanence of Paper for Printed 
Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984.
∞
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: López de Segura, Ruy, active 16th century, author. | 
McGrath, Michael J., editor, translator.
Title: The art of the game of chess / Ruy López ;  
edited and translated by Michael J. McGrath ;  
foreword by Andrew Soltis.
Other titles: Libro de la invencion liberal y arte  
del juego del axedrez. English.
Description: Washington, D.C. : The Catholic University  
of America Press, 2020. | Includes bibliographical  
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020021224 | ISBN 9780813232812 
(paperback) | ISBN 9780813232829 (ebook)  
Subjects: LCSH: Chess—Early works to 1800. 
Classification: LCC GV1442 .L8513 2020 | DDC 794.1—dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020021224

For Bri Hurst, whose
kindness and love will never
be forgotten
j



CONTENTS
contentS
 Foreword by Andrew Soltis xv
        Ac
knowledgments
        xi
i
Introduction                                                                                              1
the book oF the liberal invention  
and art oF the GaMe oF cheSS 15
 The King 16
 Ruy López of Segura’s Epistle Nuncupatory 17
Book I
 1.   In which the game of chess as a game of science and  
mathematical invention is addressed 23
 2.   In which the game of chess and laudable pastime,  
which is not just an indulgence but is necessary  
for the conservation of human life, is addressed 27
 3.   In which the identity of the inventor of this game is  
identified                                                                                                 30
 4.   In which when and where this game was invented  
is explained 32
 5.   In which the reason that the game was invented  
is explained 33
 6.   In which the reasons there were sixty-four squares,  
a square board, and elevated sides for the game of  
chess are explained 36
 7.   In which the meaning of the board’s thirty-two squares  
is explained 
 37
 8.  
 
In w
hich the names of chess and the pieces are  
ex pla i ned
                                                                                                 39

viii Contents
 9.   In which the name, shape, and position of each of  
the pieces are explained 40
 10.   In which the shape, position, and movement of  
the king are explained 42
 11.   In which the shape, position, and movement of the  
queen are explained 47
 12.   In which the shape, position, and movement of the  
bishops are explained 51
 13.   In which the shape, position, and movement of  
the knights are explained 55
 14.   In which the shape, position, and movement of the  
rooks are explained 58
 15.   In which the shape, position, and movement of the  
pawns are explained 59
 16.   In which the quality and advantage of each pawn,  
as well as which pawns are good for one thing and  
which pawns are good for another, are explained 64
 17.   In which the previous shape of the king’s pawn  
is described 67
 18.   In which the previous shape of the queen’s pawn  
is described 68
 19.   In which the previous shape of the king’s bishop’s  
pawn is described 69
 20.   In which the previous shape of the queen’s bishop’s  
pawn is described
 70
 21
.
 
 
In w
hich the previous shapes of the king’s knight’s
   
p
awn and the queen’s knight’s pawn are described
 71
 22
. 
 
 
In w
hich the previous shape of the king’s rook’s  
pawn is described
 71
 23
. 
 
 
In w
hich the previous shape of the queen’s rook’s  
pawn is described
 73
 24
. 
 
 
In w
hich the meanings of the pieces and the pawns  
of this game, in the order in which they appear,  
are explained
 74

 Contents                                                  ix
 25.   In which the meanings of simple check, double check,  
checkmate, and stalemate, as well as the reason the  
king in check does not leap, are explained 78
 26.   In which the reason the white squares of the board,  
and not the black squares, are on player’s right is  
explained                                                                                                80
 27.   In which how to move the chess pieces, how to capture  
them, how to play from memory, as well as aspects that  
must be considered, are explained 82
Book II
 1.  The first way to arrange the game with the first move 119
 2.  Another way for the player with the first move to  
open and to arrange the game 120
 3.  Another way to arrange the game, beginning similarly 121
 4.  Another way to arrange the game with the first move 126
 5.  Another way to arrange the game, beginning similarly 128
 6.   How Black can arrange his game against the  
aforementioned moves without the first move 131
 7.  Another way to play, opening with the king’s pawn 132
 8.  Another way to play, opening with the king’s pawn 133
 9.  Another way to play, opening with the king’s pawn 136
 10.  Another way to arrange the game, beginning similarly 137
 11
. 
 
 
An
other way to arrange the game, opening with  
the king’s pawn
 13
9
 12
. 
 
 
An
other way to arrange the game, opening with  
the king’s pawn
 14
3
 13
. 
 
 
An
other way to arrange the game with the king’s pawn
 14
5
 14
. 
 
 
An
other way to arrange the game, beginning similarly  
and playing as in Italy, where the pawn passes battle
 14
6
 15
. 
 An
other way to arrange the game, beginning similarly
 14
9
 16
. 
 
 
An
other way to open the game with the kings’ pawns  
and the king’s bishop’s pawn, beginning similarly
 15
1

x Contents
 17.   Another way to begin the game with the same  
kings’ pawns and the king’s bishop’s pawn 154
 18.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning with  
the aforementioned pawns 154
 19.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning with the 
same kings’ pawns and and the king’s bishop’s pawn 157
 20.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning similarly 160
 21.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning with the  
same king’s pawns and the king’s bishop’s pawn 162
 22.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning  
similarly with the aforementioned pawns 163
 23.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning with  
the same pawns 164
 24.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning similarly  
with the aforementioned pawns 166
 25.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning similarly  
with the same pawns 167
 26.   Another way for Black to arrange the game against  
the king’s bishop’s pawn’s attack 168
 27.   Another way for Black to arrange the game against  
the king’s bishop’s pawn’s attack 171
 28.   Another way for Black to arrange the game against  
the king’s bishop’s pawn’s attack 172
 29
. 
 
 
An
other way to arrange the game, beginning with  
the player whose first move is the king’s pawn; the  
opponent’s is the queen’s pawn
 17
3
Book III
 1.  Beginning to arrange the game, according to Damiano 177
 2.  Beginning to play, according to Damiano’s first way 181
 3.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning with  
Damiano’s same game 182
 4.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning with  
Damiano’s same game 185

 Contents                                                  xi
 5.   Beginning to arrange the game, according to Damiano’s  
second way 186
 6.   Beginning to arrange the game, according to  
Damiano’s third way 188
 7.   Which addresses the true way to know how to play  
the gambit game, with a statement about the oversights  
and errors that Damiano committed in the way he 
showed how to play this gambit. Stating, lastly, why this  
Game, more so than any other, is called a gambit game,  
what a “gambit” means, and where the term “gambit”  
originates                                                                                              192
 8.   Another way to begin the game on offense and defense,  
beginning with the moves from Damiano’s second and  
third games 201
 9.   Another way to begin the game on offense and defense,  
beginning with Damiano’s method 203
 10.   Another way to attack and to defend the game,  
beginning like Damiano 204
 11.   Another way to attack and to defend, beginning with  
Damiano’s aforementioned method 208
 12.   Another way for Black to arrange the game against the 
aforementioned attack 210
 13.   Another way for Black to arrange the game against the 
aforementioned attack 211
 14.   Another way for Black to arrange the game against the 
aforementioned attack
 21
3
 15
. 
 
 
An
other way to protect the king’s pawn against the  
opposing king’s knight’s attack
 21
6
 16
. 
 
 
An
other way to arrange the game, according to the  
second way to protect the pawn
 21
8
 17
. 
 
 
An
other way to arrange the game, according to the  
second way to protect the king’s pawn against the  
knight’s attack
 22
0
 18
. 
 
 
An
other way to arrange the game against the king’s  
knight’s attack, according to the second way to defend
 22
1

xii Contents
 19.     Another way to arrange the game against the knight’s  
attack, according to the third way to defend the pawn 223
 20.   Another way to arrange the game against the knight’s  
attack, according to the fourth way to defend the pawn 226
 21.   Another way to arrange the game against the king’s  
knight’s attack, protecting its pawn, according to the  
fifth way to defend the pawn 228
 22.   Beginning the game with the queen’s pawn, according  
to Damiano 230
 23.   Another way to arrange the game, beginning with  
the queen’s pawn 233
 24.   Other ways to begin the games, not starting with the 
aforementioned ways 236
Book IV
 1.   How to arrange the game to defend against a player  
who receives an advantage of two moves 241
 2.   How the player who receives an advantage of two  
moves for the king’s bishop’s pawn should arrange  
the game 243
 3.   Another way the player who receives an advantage of  
two moves for the king’s bishop’s pawn can arrange  
the game 245
 4.   How the player who receives first move advantage  
for the king’s bishop’s pawn should arrange the game
 24
6
 5.  
 
An
other way for the player who receives first move  
advantage for the king’s bishop’s pawn to arrange  
the game
 24
7
 6.  
 
An
other way for the player who receives an advantage  
of the king’s bishop’s pawn for the first move to arrange  
the game, according to Damiano
 25
0
 7.  
 
Wh
ich addresses several of the chapter’s errors and  
the aforementioned method of playing, according  
to Damiano
 25
5
 8.  
 
Ho
w the player who receives an advantage of the  
aforementioned pawn and the first move should arrange  
the game, according to Damiano
 25
9

 Contents                                                xiii
 9.   How the player who receives an advantage of a knight  
for the aforementioned pawn and the first move  
should defend, according to Damiano 263
 10.   Another way the player who receives an advantage of  
a knight for the king’s bishop’s pawn and the first  
move should defend, according to Damiano 269
 11.   How the player who receives an advantage of a knight  
for the first move should play, according to  
Damiano’s doctrine 271
 12.   Another way the player who receives an advantage of  
a knight for the first move can arrange the game 274
 13.   Another way the player who receives an advantage of  
a knight for the first move can arrange the game 277
 14.   Another way the player who receives an advantage  
of a knight for the first move can arrange the game 280
 15.   Another way the player who receives an advantage  
of a knight for the first move can arrange the game 281
Bibliography                                                                                               285
Index                                                                                                            289



 xv
FOREWORD
Foreword
Andrew Soltis
When someone begins to study chess, he or she is confronted by a baf-
fling array of names for the standard moves that begin a game. Many of 
the openings and sub-variations carry the surname of a great master of 
the past, followed by a noun. There is a Ponziani Opening, a Keres At-
tack, a Philidor’s Defense, and a From’s Gambit, for example. Some open-
ings bear a full name (the Max Lange Attack).
But only one major opening consists of just a player’s name, the Ruy 
L
ópez. It is an enormously popular way of starting a chess game, em-
ployed countless times each day in games played on the Internet, in tour-
nament rooms, and in chess clubs. Yet few players know who López was 
or why he deserves his place in chess history.
That history began about a millennium before López (1530–ca. 1580) 
was born. But what we consider “our” chess dates from the last quarter 
of the fifteenth century. That is when the rules of play were fundamen-
tally changed. The modern rules, with the enhanced power of the queen 
and bishop, were first published in 1497 in Luis de Lucena’s Repetición de 
amores e artes de ajedrez (Repetition of love and the art of playing chess). 
Today’s players know the name Lucena because it has been (incorrectly) 
attached to a standard device in rook endgames, the “Lucena Position.” 
Lucena should have gotten credit for introducing a beautiful smothered 
mate combination in his book, but it became known as “Philidor’s Lega-
cy.” This is the kind of irony that runs through chess history.
Lucena, a Spaniard, was followed by Pedro Damiano, a Portuguese 
pharmacist, and his Questo libro e da imparare giocare a scachi et de li 
partii (This book is to learn how to play chess), which was published in 
Rome in 1512. It must have been very popular, because it went through 
several editions. Damiano is remembered today primarily as a result of 

xvi Foreword
another misattribution: He analyzed the opening moves 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 
and criticized 2...f6 (see figure above). For this reason, this bad move is 
called the Damiano Defense.
Then comes Ruy Lópe
z. He was a Spanish priest and may have be-
come acquainted with Damiano’s work when he visited Rome in 1560 
on church business. At that time, the best players of modern-rules chess 
lived in Italy and Iberia. López is believed to have easily beaten the most 
skilled Italians. He may deserve the title of world champion, but that title 
did not exist until the late nineteenth century.
In 1561 L
ópe
z’s great contribution to chess, the Libro de la invención 
Algebraic notation is a universal way of recording and describing the moves in a 
game of chess. The numbers 1 and 2 denote the first moves by White and Black, 
respectively. With the exception of the pawn, there is an upper-case letter that 
corresponds to the other pieces: K = King, Q = Queen, B = Bishop, N = Knight, 
and R = Rook. As noted in the text, White moves the king’s pawn to e4 to begin 
the game; Black counters by moving his king’s pawn to e5. Then, White moves 
the knight to the square in front of his bishop’s pawn (f3). Black moves the king’s 
knight in front of his bishop’s pawn (f6). When an annotation precedes a move 
by Black, an ellipsis is added to fill the position of White’s move. Further, when 
a piece captures another piece or a pawn, an x is placed between the piece moved 
and the square upon which it captures (e.g., Bxf8); when a pawn captures, the 
x is placed between the file from which it moved and the square upon which it 
captures (e.g., exd5). A move that places the opponent’s king is check is followed 
by +; a move resulting in checkmate, by #.

 Foreword                                              xvii
liberal y arte del juego de axedrez (Book of the liberal invention and art of 
the game of chess), appeared. Judging by his acid comments, López seems 
to have been inspired by Damiano: He wanted to refute his conclusions.
López’s animus toward Damiano’s knowledge of chess recalls the or-
igin of one of the great twentieth-century books. Richard Réti, a leading 
player after World War I, was so disgusted by the writing of a popular 
chess author, Franz Gutmayer, that he was prompted to write Modern 
Ideas in Chess (1923). Réti did not directly insult Gutmayer in his book. 
By contrast, clearly L
ópe
z has contempt for Damiano. For example: “Da-
miano is greatly mistaken,” L
ópe
z writes in book 1, chapter 24, “because 
he doesn’t know what this game represents.”
Historians tend to regard François-André Philidor (1726–1795) as 
the first great chess thinker. But Libro de la invención liberal y arte del 
juego de axedrez (Book of the liberal invention and art of the game of 
chess) shows that the honor belongs to L
ópez. His insights are remark-
ably modern. Philidor was regarded as the first to raise pawns from the 
level of puny foot soldiers into significant figures. But here we have L
ópe
z 
describing the usefulness of a pawn center, particularly composed of ad-
vanced d- and e-pawns, to act as a shield for advancing pieces and as a 
safeguard against enemy attacks. L
ópez was also concerned with protect-
ing the health of a pawn structure. “The player should know not to leave 
the pawn helpless or unaccompanied,” he wrote. That is, an isolated pawn 
(a pawn that cannot be protected by a fellow pawn) is weak.
The longest and most interesting chapter, 27 of book 1, covers what 
L
ópez calls rules, though we would see them as practical tips. Remark-
ably, he begins with gamesmanship: “The first rule is when a game is 
played on a clear and sunny day, make sure the sun is in the enemy’s face 
so that it blinds him.” He justifies this suggestion—“it is useful to search 
for as many advantages as possible”—on the grounds that chess “is a bel-
lic invention.” That is, it is a war game, and any good general knows how 
to use the sun to his advantage. Later in chapter 27, he advises a player to 
“make sure” his opponent “is as tired and stressed as possible.” And try to 
choose a chess set that he is unfamiliar with.
It is difficult to know how much of what L
ópez writes is original, 

xviii Foreword
because we do not know how many chess manuscripts, in Arabic and 
other languages, are lost. This is a problem when reading, in chapter 27, 
that a rook increases in significance “when the game begins to clear out.” 
This observation is an insight about the power of the rook as the end-
game nears that even many modern masters do not fully appreciate. Did 
it originate with López? Or was he tweaking what had been known be-
fore 1475—because the rook’s ability to move had not changed under the 
modern rules?
The last half of L
ópe
z’s book (books 2, 3, and 4) is what we call open-
ing analysis. L
ópez begins with the long forgotten 1.e4 e5 2.c3 and con-
cludes that White has the better chances after 2...Nf6 3.Qc2 Bc5 4.Nf3 
Nc6 5.Bb5 d6 6.d4. Trying to follow this long notation and all the ana-
lytic chapters that follow, the reader will appreciate the economy of chess 
notation. We can express these moves in two lines of type, compared 
with the wordy passages of L
ópez.
Under the earlier rules of chess, a player normally spent the first 
ten moves or so developing his pieces into a tabia, a kind of battle array. 
Pieces and pawns did not typically cross into enemy territory—past the 
fourth rank—until all of a player’s forces were ready. A player did not 
have to pay much attention to what his opponent was doing on the other 
side of the board.
But under the modern rules, checkmate could occur in just a few 
moves. Thus the era of Damiano and L
ópez is when modern opening the-
ory begins. López points out some useful opening traps that have become 
familiar to beginning players. For example, 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nf6 is known as 
the Petrov Defense and is named after Alexander Petrov—although his 
chief contribution was to analyze it nearly three centuries after L
ópez. 
López points out that the natural 3.Nxe5, the reply 3...Nxe4 is a mistake 
that can be punished by 4.Qe2.
L
ópez also introduces the word “gambito” (gambit) in book 3, chapter 
7. He explains its Italian origin and says it is a way of beginning “a game 
of traps and impediments.” He then demolishes some Damiano analysis 
with comments such as “Contrary to Damiano, who does not know how 
to  play  .
 . . .”

 Foreword                                               xix
But where is the opening that carries the name López? In chapter 8 
he examines Damiano’s recommendation of 2...Nc6 following 1.e4 e5 
2.Nf3. Damiano is wrong, he writes, because “he does not understand 
the problems and disadvantages that could present themselves” if White 
plays differently than Damiano’s analysis. What he means is that Damia-
no recommended 3.Bc4, rather than what López considered the strongest 
move, 3.Bb5. This is the move that makes it a “Ruy L
ópez.”



 xxi
acknowledGMentS
I wish to thank, first and foremost, Trevor Lipscombe, director of the 
Catholic University of America Press, for his encouragement, support, 
and faith in my work. I am particularly grateful to Andrew Soltis, who 
kindly accepted my invitation to write the foreword. I also express my 
deep appreciation to Jorge Amador, whose thoughtful and insightful 
suggestions greatly improved the quality of the translation, and whose 
knowledge of chess and its history illuminated my understanding of Ruy 
L
ópez’s strategies. Many thanks are owed to the outside readers, whose 
astute comments and recommendations I appreciate very much. My most 
sincere and heartfelt gratitude to Anne Needham for her many insightful 
and valuable editorial suggestions.



The Art 
of  The  
Game of 
Chess

INTRODUCTION

 1
introduction
Chess is a powerful reducing agent. It can reduce a whole bat-
tlefield or city or planet down to sixty-four squares. And yet, 
within that simplistic frame, chess retains its active quality; 
like a snow globe, it shrinks things down, but retains its dy-
namic essence.
1
When the Moors invaded the Iberian Peninsula in 711, the populari-
ty of the game of chess, which the Muslims had adopted after the Islam-
ic conquest of Persia in the seventh century, spread quickly throughout 
southern Europe. According to the oldest myth that explains the inven-
tion of chess, King Hashrān of India asked his sage Qaflān to invent a 
game that would illustrate a human being’s dependence on destiny and 
fate. Qaflān conceived of nard, a board game between two players whose 
roll of the dice determined how their respective pieces move. When King 
Balhait, who succeeded King Hashrān, learned that the fatalist traits of 
nard were not in concert with his religious beliefs, he encouraged his sub-
jects to adopt a new game of skill that appealed to the value he placed on 
free will and intelligence. King Balhait soon discovered, however, other 
uses for the board and pieces of this game he often played against the wise 
men in his court:
He also made of this game a kind of allegory of the heavenly bodies (eleven 
planets and the twelve zodiacal signs), and dedicated each piece to a star. The 
game of chess became a school of government and defense; it was consulted in 
time of war, when military tactics were about to be employed, to study the more 
or less rapid movements of troops.
2
An  iteration  of  the  game  that  originated  in  India  emerged  in  Persia  
during the fifth century. Chatrang was an adaptation of the Sanskrit 
1. Shenk, The Immortal Game, 56.
2. Ibid., 25

2 IntroduCtIon
word chaturanga. Both words, according to chess historian H. J. R. Mur-
ray, are “in their respective languages the ordinary names for the game of 
chess.”3 In the twelfth century, Abraham ibn Ezrah (1092–1167), a Jewish 
scholar of religion, astronomy, mathematics, and astrology, who was born 
in Navarre (Spain), wrote a poem titled “The Song of Chess”:
I will sing a song of battle
Planned in days long passed and over.
Men of skill and science set it
On a plain of eight divisions,
And designed in squares all chequered.
Two camps face each one the other.
And the Kings stand by for battle,
And ’twixt these two is the fighting.
Bent on war the face of each is,
Ever moving or encamping.
Yet no swords are drawn in warfare,
For a war of thoughts their war is.
4
The most influential proponent of the game of chess in the Middle Ages, 
however, was Alfonso X el Sabio (Alfonso X the Learned), who was the 
king of Castile from 1252 to 1284. He commissioned a book about a vari-
ety of games, including chess, titled Libros de acedrex, dados e tablas (12 83; 
also known as Libro de los juegos or Book of Games). The book consists 
of seven parts and one hundred fifty miniatures that illustrate the text. 
The first part of the book is about the game of chess, and it consists of 
sixty-four miniatures.
The popularity of chess in Europe during the Middle Ages was espe-
cially due to the game’s allegorical moral instruction. One of the oldest 
chess moralities is Quaedam moralitas de scaccario (1250), whose author-
ship is attributed to the Franciscan theologian John of Wales (1220–
1290).5 Unlike other chess moralities, however, Quaedam moralitas de 
scaccario depicts a world of depravity, whose inhabitants, as represented 
3. Murray, A History of Chess, 31.
4. Shenk, The Immortal Game, 165.
5. The English translations of Quaedam moralitas de scaccario include Innocent Morali-
ty or All the World’s a Chess-Board. For more information on the different translations, see 
Juel, “Defeating the Devil at Chess,” 87n1.

 IntroduCtIon                                              3
by the pieces, are, with the exception of the king and the rook, bereft of 
virtue.6 All of the earliest chess moralities, including Quaedam moralitas 
de scaccario, portray the game as a window into the soul of the players, as 
Jenny Adams observes: “Although used initially as a representation of so-
cial order, chess by this point has become a test of an individual’s virtue. 
If any person−the text has now conflated the player and the reader−falls 
into sin, he will lose both the game and his soul.”7
Jacobus de Cessolis (1250–1322), who was a Dominican monk from 
Italy, allegorizes the chess board as a city in his morality book Liber de 
moribus hominum et officiis nobilium super ludo scacchorum (1330).8 Ad-
ams notes the impact of Jacobus de Cessolis’s Liber on the body politic in 
the late Middle Ages:
Upon the game’s arrival in Europe in the late tenth century, medieval cultures 
deliberately turned it into a representation of their own social milieu(s). By the 
late thirteenth century chess had become so popular and so well known that 
Jacobus de Cessolis had little difficulty harnessing its allegorical power, and 
he drew on the game’s mimetic qualities in order to model the workings of a 
contractually based political order. In doing so he provided a way for people to 
think about their identities as individuals and as citizens. If the Liber’s allegory 
allowed a player the fantasy of ultimate power over the game, its exempla re
-
minded individuals of their responsibility to the political community.
9
Ruy López, however, eschews Cessolis’s allegory that the chess board 
is a city and chooses instead to address the game as if it were a military 
campaign: “We have always refuted that opinion and teaching, demon-
strating here that the board represents not a city but a battlefield with 
two kings, whose warriors are prepared to do battle.”10 Murray notes that 
6. “In this game the Devil says, ‘Check!’ while cursing or striking anyone with the barb 
of sin, [and] unless he more quickly says, ‘Clear,’ by passing to the penance of a sorrowful 
heart, the Devil says, ‘Mate!’ leading his soul off to the lower levels of hell where it will not 
be freed” (Adams, Power Play, 44).
7. Ibid., 45.
8. “And first we ought to speke of the forme and of the facion of the chequer, after that 
hit representeth and was made after. For hit was made after the forme of the cyté of Baby-
loyne, in the whiche this same playe was founden, as hit is sayd afore.” Thus, William Cax-
ton, who published an English translation of Jacobus de Cessolis’s book in 1474; the quote is 
from a modern edition: Caxton, The Game and the Playe of Chesse, 150.
9. Adams, Power Play, 157.
10. The Art of the Game of Chess, book 1, chapter 24

4 IntroduCtIon
chess resembles a war because war is the “most effective school for teach-
ing the value of administration, decision, prudence, caution, arrange-
ment, strategy, circumspection, vigour, courage, force, endurance, and 
bravery.”11 Author David Shenk extends the metaphor of war, writing: 
“Chess was, in a sense, medieval presentation software—the PowerPoint 
of the Middle Ages. It was a customizable platform for poets, philoso-
phers, and other intellectuals to explore and to present a wide array of 
complex ideas in a visual and compelling way.”12
During the second half of the fifteenth century, chess moralities, 
for the most part, do not provide the explicit moral instruction of ear-
lier treatises, because the advent of the rules of modern chess (c. 1475) 
inspired their authors to focus more on how to play the game: “Eventu-
ally, the game would take on a pan-European character. But for the first 
few centuries, citizens of the Middle Ages seemed to be more enamored 
of the game’s social carriage than its intellectual ferocity.”13 Two of the 
earliest treatises on modern chess are the Göttingen manuscript, a Lat-
in text that begins with a description of twelve openings and concludes 
with thirty problems, each of which is followed by a diagram and a solu-
tion,14 and Repetición de amores y arte de ajedrez con 150 juegos de partido 
(1497; Repetition of love and the art of playing chess), by the Spaniard 
Luis Ramírez de Lucena (1465–1530), who dedicated his book to Prince 
11. Murray, A History of Chess, 255. Murray and Shenk discuss several myths and legends 
that describe the invention of the game of chess in their respective books. Murray notes that 
there are at least four legends that analogize chess and war (ibid., 257).
12. Shenk, The Immortal Game, 26.
13. Shenk, The Immortal Game, 58. The allegorical associations with the game of chess 
did not disappear. A late fifteenth-century poem titled Le jeu des esches de la dame, moralisé 
(The lady’s game of chess, moralized) is an explicit religious allegory. In Miguel de Cervant-
es’s masterpiece Don Quixote (Part 1: 1605; Part 2: 1615), Sancho Panza describes chess as an 
allegory of death: “like the business of the game of chess−while it’s being played, each piece 
has its particular function, but when the game is over, they’re all mixed up and jumbled to-
gether, and they’re put into a bag, which is like finishing one’s life in the grave” (Cervantes, 
Don Quixote, 492).
14. The twelve openings are the Damiano Defense, Philidor Defense, Giuoco Piano 
(also called the Italian Opening), Petrov Defense, Bishop’s Opening, Ruy L
ópe
z, Ponziani 
Opening, Philidor Defense (favors Black), Queen’s Gambit Accepted, London System, 
Bird’s Opening, and English Opening. A position in chess endgame theory is named after 
Lucena, although it does not appear in his book. The possible moves of the Lucena position 
require one player to have a rook and a pawn and the other player to have a rook.

 IntroduCtIon                                             5
John of Asturias (1478–1497), the only son of Queen Isabella I of Castile 
and King Ferdinand II of Aragon. The authorship and date of composi-
tion of the Göttingen manuscript are the subject of dispute among chess 
historians. Murray postulates that Lucena is the author of the Göttin-
gen manuscript. Furthermore, Murray believes that Lucena wrote it after 
Repetición de amores y arte de ajedrez, perhaps as late as 1505, because of 
the manuscript’s more thoughtful explanations and descriptions:
The analysis in the Göttingen MS. shows a greater command of, and familiarity 
with, the new game than Lucena exhibits in his book. Both works have a cer-
tain amount of material in common, but this does not necessarily mean that 
ei
ther writer had access to the other’s work, for both may have been using older 
material. It is, however, singular that a later MS. of the 16th c. . . . re
peats the 
Openings of the Göttingen MS. in a slightly modernized form as the work of 
Lucena. If this ascription is correct, we are compelled to the conclusion that the 
Göttingen MS. is Lucena’s later, because more mature, work on chess.
15
Murray further explains:
Lucena’s analysis consists of eleven Openings, of which the first seven (II–VIII) 
are devoted to the attack, and the remaining four (IX–XII) to the defence. It 
is less systematic than two Openings of minor importance, 1 Pe3 (X) and 1 Pb3 
(XII). In the Openings beginning 1 Pe4, he just notices the French Defence 
(VII) and the Centre Counter Gambit (VI). He devotes two games to the 
King’s Bishop’s Opening (XI begins 2 Bc4, Pc6; VIII, 2 Bc4, Pd6). The other 
Openings included are the Damiano Gambit (II), the Philidor (IV), the Petroff 
(V), the Giuoco Piano (III), and the Ruy Lopez [IX, defended 3.., Kt (g1) e2].
16
Fritz C. Gorschen, however, hypothesizes that the author of the Göttin-
gen manuscript was a Spaniard or a Portuguese who composed it at the 
court of Alfonso V of Portugal between the years 1471 and 1475. More 
recently, chess historian Richard Eales affirms the manuscript’s Iberian 
origin, a theory he bases on its similarities to Lucena’s book: “An Iberian 
origin for the Göttingen work is all the more plausible because its con-
tents are very directly related to those of Lucena’s book.”17
The earliest account of a game of chess between two players who move 
15. Murray, A History of Chess, 998.
16. Ibid., 1002, brackets in the original.
17. Eales, Chess: The History of a Game, 74 .

6 IntroduCtIon
the king and the queen according to the rules of modern chess is in the 
late fifteenth-century Catalan poem “Scachs d’amor” (“The chess game 
of love”). This poem, which consists of sixty-four stanzas, describes how 
Francí de Castellví i de Vic (d. 1506), a nobleman and poet from Valencia, 
Spain, who not only is one of the poem’s three authors but also represents 
the character Mars in the game, checkmates Narcís Vinyoles (c. 1445–
1517), a poet and politician from Valencia, who plays the game as Venus. 
Bernat Fenollar (1438–1516), who was a poet, an abbot, and a professor of 
mathematics at the University of Valencia, is the character Mercury, who 
establishes the rules of the game and provides commentary. The follow-
ing stanzas describe each player’s first move:
Castellví
(King’s pawn to the fourth house)
The fields assigned and all the men at ready,
The great warrior, with his red standard,
Decided to move as soon as required
Taking Love as the name for the battle;
He moved towards the field of the beautiful
The most valiant pawn in conquest:
He moved two paces towards her.
By this move the King discovers Reason
And opens the road of Will.
Vinyoles
(Queen’s pawn to the fourth house)
The gentle Lady, not lacking in spirit,
Carrying the green banner of Hope
And shouting: “Glory, glory covers
My people with all blessings!”
Her pawn, courteous, well-tempered
Moves up, because Beauty opens,
In the game of love, the first step.
With a humble gesture for defense,
Her heart was pierced with the thrust of love.
After each player moves a piece, Fenollar addresses the context of the 
game at that moment:

 IntroduCtIon                                             7
Fenollar
(He says that a piece touched must be played)
The first rule you must abide by
Is, in this game, that a piece once touched
Firmly, admitting neither debate nor confront,
By any player, true, must be played.
It falls to reason: for a lover’s thoughts
Having chosen, cannot freedom afford
Or doubt, but take full submission.
Thus the saying: “Courage and folly
In every move, as once done, done it is!”
18
Fenollar’s narration also provides the reader with a comprehensive ac-
count of the rules of chess in Aragon: “He tells us, for example, that the 
pawn can be taken in passing; that the King when moved for the first 
time can leap to a third square, provided he does not cross a square com-
manded by an opponent, but that he cannot leap out of check or take 
when leaping, . . . th
at one Queen cannot take another, and that to lose 
the Queen is to lose the game.”19 Feminist author and historian Mari-
lyn Yalom notes that the queen’s transformation into the most powerful 
piece on the board coincided with the rule of Isabella as queen of Castile 
and León, and then as queen of Spain in 1492:
It was during this period that “new chess” featuring the formidable queen came 
into being. A militant queen more powerful than her husband had arisen in 
Castile; why not on the chessboard as well? This may have been the thinking 
of those players from Valencia who endowed the chess queen with her extend-
ed range of motion. Perhaps they even hoped to win favor from the queen by 
p
r
omoting the chess queen. Yet it is just as likely that those Valencian players 
unconsciously redesigned the queen on the model of the all-powerful Isabella.
20
Yalom also cites Isabella’s proclamation ceremony as queen of Castile and 
León in Segovia as an example of the “Warrior Queen’s” demeanor.21 The 
18. Sobrer, “The English Translation of Scachs d’amor.” 
19. Murray, A History of Chess, 996–97.
20. Yalom, Birth of the Chess Queen, 244.
21. “The proclamation ceremony that took place in Segovia was a majestic triumph, 
orchestrated by the young queen herself. Magnificently dressed and bejeweled, she stood 
on a platform in the portal of the church of San Miguel, where she was hailed as queen 

8 IntroduCtIon
popularity of chess throughout Europe, especially in Spain and Italy, con-
tinued to grow throughout Ruy López’s lifetime.
Rodrigo “Ruy” López was born in 1530 in Zafra, a small town in 
southwestern Spain, where his parents, who were successful merchants, 
raised him.22   López studied for the priesthood in Salamanca, and after 
ordination he returned to Zafra, where he served as pastor at the Church 
of Santa María de la Candelaria. His next assignment was in Madrid as 
the confessor and royal advisor to King Philip II. As a connoisseur of 
chess, King Philip II promoted the game in his court, and it did not take 
long for L
ópez to become known as one of Europe’s greatest chess players 
and the best chess player in Spain.23
During L
ópe
z’s lifetime, two of the most accomplished chess play-
ers were the Italians Giovanni Leonardo da Cutri (1542–1597) and Paolo 
Boi (1528–1598). When L
ópez traveled to Italy on ecclesiastical business 
in 1560, Pope Pius IV, who was a chess enthusiast, also extended a spe-
of Castile and León. . . . The procession from the church offered a splendid spectacle to the 
townspeople. Isabella rode on horseback, while the nobles and dignitaries surrounded her 
and marched behind. At the very head of the procession rode a horseman carrying a naked 
sword with the point downward, resembling a cross. Isabella chose to revive this ancient 
symbol of militant faith and justice, although the traditional monarch’s symbol in Castile 
was a scepter. The sword recalled not only the royal conquerors who had wrested Spain from 
the Moors, but also the feats of the warrior maid Joan of Arc, earlier in the century. As one 
of Isabella’s recent biographers astutely observed, the sword represented power on many lev-
els and made clear to everyone ‘that the queen and not her consort .
 . . wa
s the heir-proper of 
those Castilian heroes of the reconquest’” (ibid., 233–34).
22. Zafra is forty-five miles southwest of Badajoz (Extremadura).
23. L
ópe
z earned the favor of Philip II, who rewarded him handsomely. One honor the 
king never bestowed on L
ópe
z, however, was the bishopric mistakenly attributed to him to 
this day. Murray notes that “López was presented by the king with a golden chain for his 
neck, from which was suspended a rook, and obtained preferment to a rich benefice” (A 
History of Chess, 1040), adding in a footnote: “But not the bishopric to which some writers 
of the 19th c., e.g. George Walker . . . , ha
ve raised him” (ibid., 1190n8). In “Ruy Lopez, the 
Chess-Bishop: A Legend of Spain,” Walker writes that during a game of chess between the 
king and L
ópe
z, Philip II anxiously awaited confirmation that his order to execute a traitor, 
a grandee of Spain, had been carried out. When Spain’s chief executioner informed Philip 
that the traitor, citing royal privilege, demanded a confessor who was not below the rank of 
a bishop, the king, after being told that none of the local bishops were available, declared: 
“If the King of Spain can beget a prince, he can surely create a bishop. Stand forth, Ruy Lo-
pez, Bishop of Segovia! Stand forth, priest, I command, and assume thy rank in the church! 
.
 . . Pe
ace, lord-bishop, and obey thy sovreign’s word! The formalities of thy installment re-
main for a future day. Our subjects cannot fail to respect the will of the king in this matter” 
(Walker, Chess & Chess-Players, 189–90).

 IntroduCtIon                                             9
cial invitation to López to visit him in Rome. While there, López played 
and defeated Leonardo and Boi. López returned to Italy in 1573 and, once 
again, defeated Italy’s best players, including Leonardo, whom he defeat-
ed two times, and Boi. López’s reign as Europe’s unofficial chess champi-
on would end in 1575, however, the year that King Philip II organized the 
first International Grandmaster Chess Tournament at El Escorial. The 
only participants were the Spaniards Ruy L
ópez and Alfonso de Cerón 
and the Italians Leonardo Cutri and Paolo Boi. Leonardo defeated Boi to 
win the tournament, and Lópe
z finished in third place. Leonardo’s win-
nings included one thousand ducats, an ermine cape, and, at his request, 
two gifts to his hometown of Cutro: it did not have to pay taxes for a 
period of twenty years, and henceforth it would be known as the “City of 
Chess.” King Philip II also rewarded Boi handsomely, bestowing on him 
official appointments in Italy that paid very well and a letter in which the 
monarch recommended Boi to Philip’s half-brother, Don John of Austria 
(1547–1578).
During his first sojourn in Italy, in 1560, L
ópez read Libro da im-
parare giocare a scachi (Book of how to learn to play chess; 1512), the first 
Italian chess treatise, whose author, Pedro Damião (1480–1544; his Ital-
ianized name was Pedro Damiano), was a Portuguese chess player. L
ópe
z 
wrote Libro de la invención liberal y arte del juego del axedrez shortly after 
he returned to Spain, no doubt inspired by his disgust with Damiano’s 
treatise:
In addition to what has been said about ways to play and to arrange the games, 
I try to illustrate the specifics of Damiano’s errors, as well as the mistakes of 
others who are unable to teach effectively how to play the game of chess. The 
chapters that follow consist of detailed explanations. I will begin by showing 
the offenses and defenses that are common to games that begin equally. Then, I 
will discuss Damiano’s offenses and defenses, including his errors, and propose 
ways to improve the offense and the defense. Last, I will illustrate the many 
ways a player who has an advantage can arrange his game. In addition, I will 
explain Damiano’s errors and propose corrections.
24
24. Book 1, chapter 27.

10 IntroduCtIon
Furthermore, López does not conceal his disrespect for Damiano’s book: 
“There are other blunders in this game about which I write. It seems that 
Damiano designed it asleep.”25 In spite of its perceived shortcomings, 
there were eight editions of Damiano’s book in the sixteenth century 
alone and two more in the seventeenth century. In addition, there were 
translations into French, German, and English. Lopez’s book, on the 
other hand, appeared into Italian in the second half of the sixteenth cen-
tury, and variants of this free translation later appeared in French and  
German.
While the openings that L
ópez suggests in books 2, 3, and 4 are well 
known as the “Ruy López,” the relatively small number of editions and 
translations may be attributed to the presence of material from other 
sources, as Murray notes: “The first book treats of the origin and utility 
of chess, with many quotations from Cessolis, Reyna’s Spanish translation 
of which had appeared as recently as 1549.
 . . . The second book contains a 
miscellaneous collection of Openings, and was probably in MS. before the 
visit to Italy.”26 In addition, Murray observes that López wrote his book 
with “dangerous rapidity−dangerous because it resulted in a list 8 pages 
long of misprints and other errors−and his book was published not long 
after his return to Spain in the spring of 1561 (the privilege is dated the last 
day of February, 1561).”27 Murray also calls into question the originality of 
L
ópez’s advice to players in book 1: “The advice to players in the first book 
is divided into 36 paragraphs. There is very little that is really new in the 
first 18 of these: in the main they are taken (without acknowledgement) 
from Damiano. The advice to place your opponent with the sun in his 
eyes if you play by day, and with the candle at his right hand if you play 
by night, is in Lucena, and was probably a trick well known to Spanish 
players.”28 Finally, Murray points out L
ópez’s dependence on Francisco 
25. López, Libro de la invención liberal y arte del juego del axedrez, book 4, chapter 8. In 
1563, L
ópe
z published a Latin grammar book titled Grammaticae Institutiones (Grammati-
cal Institutes) in which the vitriol with which he critiques the grammatical philosophy of the 
humanist Francisco Sánchez de las Brozas (1523–1600), who was known as “El Brocense,” is 
reminiscent of his feelings about Damiano’s treatise.
26. Murray, A History of Chess, 10 37.
27. Ibid., 1036.
28. Ibid., 1037.

 IntroduCtIon                                             11
Bernardino Caldogno’s poem “De ludo scachorum” (“On the game of 
chess”): “The advice not to sacrifice Knight or Bishop for two pawns, un-
less you can see a certain victory as a result, is in Caldogno’s poem.”29
Nonetheless, the popularity of chess all over the world is due in no 
small part to Ruy López’s book. In addition to its impact on European 
chess, Lopez’s book shaped how chess was played in the New World, 
where it reached new heights in post-colonial America. Cuban world 
chess champion José Raúl Capablanca (1888–1942) was a disciple of Ruy 
L
ópe
z. Chess historian Isaak Linder notes that Capablanca’s prepara-
tion for important matches and major tournaments centered on the 
Spaniard’s openings: “But already during his preparations for his match 
with Lasker and for some of the major international tournaments of the 
1920s and 1930s, he carefully studied opening theory and, particularly, 
the theory of the openings he employed most frequently, the Queen’s 
Gambit and the Ruy Lopez.”30 In Argentina, author Jorge Luis Borges 
(1899–1986) includes “A translation with prologue and notes of the Li-
bro de la invención liberal y arte del juego del axedrez by Ruy L
ópez de 
Segura (Paris, 1907)” on Menard’s list of “visible” lifework in the short 
story “Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote.”31  Hispanist Sergio Gabriel 
Waisman astutely equates Menard’s translation of Ruy L
ópe
z’s book to 
Miguel de Cervantes’s creation of his masterpiece Don Quixote: “Also, 
since Ruy L
ópez de Segura founded the modern system of chess around 
1560, translating/rewriting his text is, in a way, analogous to rewriting/
translating Cervantes’s text if we think of Cervantes as the founder of the 
modern system of the novel.”32
29. Ibid.
30. Linder, José Raúl Capablanca, 262.
31. Borges, “Chess,” trans. Alastair Reid. A common literary device in Borges’s literature 
is the metaphor of the chess game. In part 2 of the poem “The Game of Chess,” Borges writes: 
“Tenuous king, slant bishop, bitter queen, / straightforward castle and the crafty pawn— / 
over the checkered black and white terrain / they seek out and enjoin their armed campaign. 
/ They do not realize the dominant / hand of the player rules their destiny. / They do not 
know an adamantine fate / governs their choices and controls their journey. / The player, too, 
is captive of caprice / (the sentence is Omar’s) on another ground / crisscrossed with black 
nights and white days. / God moves the player, he, in turn, the piece. / But what god beyond 
God begins the round / of dust and time and dream and agonies?” (Borges, “Chess,” 75–76).
32. Waisman, Borges and Translation, 98.

12 IntroduCtIon
In part 2, chapter 62 of his masterpiece Don Quixote (1615), Cervantes 
offers this opinion on translations:
But despite all this, it seems to me that translating from one language into 
another, unless it is from Greek and Latin, the queens of all languages, is like 
looking at Flemish tapestries from the wrong side out, for although the figures 
are visible, they are covered by threads that obscure them, and cannot be seen 
with the smoothness and color of the right side.
33
The quixotic challenge of undertaking a translation of any genre of lit-
erature is daunting. For the reader, the translator becomes in many ways 
the author of the text. Consequently, I endeavored to recreate as faithful-
ly as possible, syntactically and grammatically, the experience of reading 
Ruy López’s treatise in Spanish. While I remained as faithful as possible 
to the original text, it was necessary at times to alter it in order to im-
prove its readability. My translation is based entirely on the first edition 
of L
ópez’s text (from 1561).34 The main dictionary I consulted was the 
Diccionario de autoridades (1726–1739), which is the first dictionary pub-
lished by Spain’s Royal Spanish Academy. The highly specialized nature 
of chess vocabulary and the number of changes the game has undergone 
since López published his book presented unique challenges, which I will 
address more specifically in the footnotes.
The Art of the Game of Chess is the first English translation of Lópe
z’s 
entire book. Giovanni Domenico Tarsia published the Italian translation 
in 1584. French editions are from 1609, 1615, 1636, 1665, and 1674.35 Au-
33. Cervantes, Don Quixote, 873. These words inspired me to research the numerous 
English translations of Don Quixote. I wondered how well a translator could recreate the 
literary, cultural, and linguistic elements of a novel from seventeenth-century Spain. The 
result of my research was an article based on a comparison of eight English translations of 
the novel (1949–2005): “Tilting at Windmills: Don Quijote in English,” Bulletin of the Cer-
vantes Society of America 26 (2006): 7–39. Subsequently, I conducted research for two more 
articles: “Looking at Flemish Tapestries from the Front: A ‘Perfect’ English Translation of 
Don Quijote,” in “Aquí se imprimen libros”: Cervantine Studies in Honor of Tom Lathrop, ed. 
Mark Groundland (Oxford: University of Mississippi Press, 2008), 99–105; and “Modern 
Translations of Don Quijote,” in The Cervantean Heritage: Influence and Reception of Cer-
vantes in Britain, ed. John Ardila (London: Legenda, 2009), 76–83.
34. Ruy L
ópez de Segura, Libro de la invencion liberal y arte del juego del axedrez (A l-
calá de Henares: Andrés de Angulo, 1561), https://archive.org/details/bub_ gb_n3s8AAAA-
cAAJ.
35. Murray, A History of Chess, 1061.

 IntroduCtIon                                            13
gustus, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneberg, published the German translation 
Das Schach- oder König-Spiel under the pseudonym Gustavus Selenus in 
1616.36 Stéphane Laborde published an abbreviated French translation in 
2015.37 Fewer than ten copies of the original 1561 edition exist today.
Ruy López dedicates his treatise to García de Toledo Osorio—who 
was the tutor and steward of Prince Charles, King Philip II’s eldest son—
in part, to ensure that the prince, whom L
ópez notes is a chess enthusiast, 
will read it. Since this time, the name Ruy López has been synonymous 
with one of the more popular ways to begin a chess match. Only chess 
historians who knew either Spanish or one of the few European languag-
es (French, German, Italian) in which López’s book was available in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, however, were able to appreciate the 
significance of his contributions. I do not consider my translation a schol-
arly research monograph on early modern Spanish chess. It is intended 
for an eclectic audience that consists of academics and non-academics 
alike, including chess historians, chess enthusiasts, historians of Europe 
(especially Spain), linguists, sociologists, and Hispanists.
36. Ibid., 1072.
37. López, Livre de l ’ invention liberale et art du jeu d’echecs, ed. and trans. Laborde.



 15
THE KING
BOOK OF THE  
LIBERAL INVENTION  
AND ART OF THE  
GAME OF CHESS, very  
useful and beneficial as much  
for those who want to learn  
how to play as for those  
who know how to play.
Composed recently by Ruy López de Segura,  
resident priest of the town of Zafra. Dedicated  
to the very illustrious gentleman García de Toledo,  
tutor and lord steward of the  
Most Serene Prince Charles, our lord.1
In Alcalá, at the printing house of  
Andrés de Angulo, 1561.2
With Privilege.
Each sheet is worth five blancas.3
1. García de Toledo Osorio (1514–77) was a Spanish general and politician to whom 
King Philip II (1556–98) awarded two titles of nobility, Duke of Fernandina and Prince of 
Montalbán, in 1569 for his military exploits; Prince Charles (1545–68) was the eldest son of 
Philip II. López states in the epistle nuncupatory (below) that Prince Charles’s enthusiasm 
for the game of chess inspired him to write his book.
2. Alcalá de Henares is twenty-two miles northeast of Madrid. This city of nearly two 
hundred thousand people is the birthplace of Miguel de Cervantes (1547–1616); Andrés 
de Angulo, who had four printing presses, was the most successful printer in Alcalá de 
Henares. In 1572, Angulo commented on why books printed in Spain have mistakes: “it is 
almost unheard of for an author to give the printer a properly prepared manuscript in which 
the spelling is accurate and the punctuation correct. This is because there are very few writ-
ers, however learned they may be, who are competent in those skills” (Griffin, Journeymen 
Printers, Heresy, and the Inquisition, 159).
3. The Council of Castile determined that the maximum retail price allowed for the 

16 tHe KInG
the kinG
We were informed by you, Ruy López, resident priest of the town 
of Zafra, that you had written a book titled Liberal Invention of Chess, 
which had cost you much hard work. You requested that we grant to you 
license and permission for the time we generously allow, and that no oth-
er person may print or sell, under serious penalties, or possess a printed 
copy from another territory, except you, the aforementioned Ruy L
ópez, 
or the person who represents you, or whatever we generously allow, the 
matter having been reviewed by the members of our Council.4 Since the 
book satisfied the requirements of our regulations on this matter, it was 
agreed that we should grant our approbation for the reasons stated above, 
and we are in agreement.5
For these reasons, I grant to you and to the person who represents 
you license and permission to print and to sell the aforementioned book 
for a period of ten consecutive years, which shall begin and be counted 
from the date of this, our authorization.6 And I order and prohibit that 
no other person shall print or sell this book during the aforementioned 
period of time under penalty of forfeiting all of the printed copies of the 
book and a fine of ten thousand maravedís, to be paid to our Chamber, 
provided that each printed page of the aforementioned printing has sold 
or sells for five blancas, and no more.7
sale of López’s book, or its tasa, was five blancas per printed sheet that came off of the press. 
A printed sheet does not correspond to the actual number of pages in a book, because a sin-
gle sheet, folded and cut, could produce as few as two pages or as many as sixty-four pages, 
depending on the size of the book.
4. The king at the time of publication was Philip II (1556–1598). The hierarchy of Spain’s 
government at this time consisted of Royal Councils, which served the king; their repre-
sentatives were primarily lawyers, known as letrados, and bishops. The Council with the 
most authority, after the king, became known as the Council of Castile during the reign of 
Charles I of Spain (1516–1556).
5. The licensing laws under Philip II were as strict as at any other time in Spain’s history. 
Sanctions included the public burning of illicit books, the confiscation of property from 
booksellers and printers, and even the death penalty. A royal scribe examined each page of 
a manuscript closely, notarized it, and made the necessary corrections. The printer returned 
the notarized manuscript as well as two copies of the book to the censors, who had to ap-
prove of the printed version (Folger, Writing as Poaching, 6 9).
6. February 28, 1561.
7. The Royal Chamber was a tribunal whose representatives included the president and 
ministers of the Council of Castile.

 epIstle nunCupatory                                    17
And, furthermore, I order the members of my Council, presiding 
judges of the courts, magistrates, bailiffs of my household, court, and 
chanceries, and all of the justices whomsoever they shall be, from all of 
the cities, towns, and villages of our kingdom and our lands, and to each 
and every one of them, those who are in place now as well as those who 
will follow, that they keep and comply with, and ensure that others keep 
and comply with as well, this, my authorization and favor that we grant. 
And may no one disobey it in any way under penalty of losing our favor 
and a fine of twenty thousand maravedís, to be paid to my Chamber.8
Issued in Aranjuez the final day of the month of February of 1561.9
I, the King.
By order of His Majesty: Juan Vázquez.10
ruy lópez oF SeGura’S epiStle nuncupatory
Dedicated to the very illustrious gentleman  
García de Toledo, tutor and lord steward of the  
Most Serene Prince Charles, our lord.
Since it was not favorable to some people, very Illustrious Lord, that I 
should write something much time before now about the game of Chess 
so that they could benefit by learning to play this quite ingenious game, 
I did not write about it, nor did I feel inclined to do so, until this present 
time, when I felt particularly inspired for several reasons. One, the obsti-
nate petition of friends, who must not be refused many things, and espe-
cially if what is requested is fair and virtuous. Another reason, it seemed 
to me to be a more apt time to do it than before, after seeing that many 
men and important people indulged in this type of pleasure. A third rea-
son, which is the most important, was seeing that the Most Serene Prince 
Charles, whose life may it please God, our Lord, prospers happily for a 
8. 20,000 maravedís would be about $33,000 today.
9. The city of Aranjuez is twenty-six miles south of Madrid. The Royal Palace of Aran-
juez, built in 1561, when Philip II moved the capital from Toledo to Madrid, was one of the 
four seats of government, along with Rascafría, El Escorial, and Madrid.
10. Juan Vázquez de Molina (1510–70) was Philip II’s secretary of state. Vázquez de Moli-
na was born and died in Úbeda (Andalucía), where there is a palace and a plaza named for him.
epiStle nuncupatory

18 epIstle nunCupatory
long time, seemed to enjoy learning about it and watching it played. Con-
sequently, what I had not wanted to do before unless begged of me, now I 
am motivated to do by the aforementioned reasons.
I endeavored to compose this work so that those who know nothing 
can benefit by becoming more skilled. Because, as Tullius says in book 2 of 
the Tusculanae disputationes: “Ut ager quamvis fertilis sine cultura fructu-
osus esse non potest, sic sine doctrina animus.”11 As a field, it says, however 
fertile, is not able to bear fruit without cultivation, so is the mind without 
education. Tullius in the Oratio in L. Catilinam prima says: “Neque enim 
ignore, et quae bona sint, fieri meliora posse doctrina.”12 Do not ignore, it 
says, things that are good, for they can be done better with teaching. Isidore 
says in the second of his Soliloquies, chapter 41: “Excellentior fit natura doc-
trina .”13 Nature, he says, is made better and more excellent with teaching. 
If some people were to say that it is not reasonable to teach someone to play 
this game because of the variety of possible moves, and that it would be 
more beneficial to show only a few moves, let it be known that the other 
player does not play the same moves but different ones. To this assertion, I 
say that whoever wants to learn this art must practice the different ways to 
play, ways about which one writes and teaches, for the contrary moves may 
be confusing if they are not studied the way they appear in the game.
If it seemed that I did not say all that could be said in this book, it 
should not come as a surprise, and neither should I be blamed, unless I 
make a significant mistake. And even if there is one, do not give up on 
me. A person cannot be as meticulous in large endeavors as in small ones. 
As the Code of Law, titled De veteri jure enucleando.L.2, says: “possit 
unius forsitan et deterioris sententia et multos et maiores in aliqua parte 
superare.”14 The judgment of one, it says, although inferior, can surpass 
11. Marcus Tullius Cicero (106–43 b.c.) was a Roman politician, a lawyer, a renowned 
orator, and a prolific author of treatises on rhetoric, philosophy, and politics. The Tu s c u l a n   
Disputations (c. 45 b.c.) are a series of five books on Stoic philosophy: On the Contempt of 
Death, On Bearing Pain, On Grief, On the Passions, and Is Virtue Sufficient for Happiness?
12. The First Oration of Cicero against Lucius Catiline is the first of five speeches Cicero 
delivered to the Roman Senate in 63 b.c.
13. The Soliloquies, also known as Synonyms or Lamentation of the Soul, is a treatise on 
sin and repentance.
14. The Codex of Justinian, 270–71 (book 1, title 17, De veteri jure enucleando [Concern-
ing taking the kernels from the ancient law], constitution 1, paragraph 6). The quote L
ópe
z 

 epIstle nunCupatory                                    19
in some respects the judgment of many, even if superior. Consequently, 
one must not be considered wise for finding any defect in their works, 
nor should the others be condemned. As Horace says in the Ars poeti-
ca: “Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. Verum opere longo fas est 
obrepere somnum.”15 I, too, am indignant when the good Homer sleeps; 
yet, truthfully, sleeping is permitted to overcome the writer of a long 
work, because, as Tullius says in Oratio in L. Catilinam prima: “Neque 
est omnino ars ulla, in qua omnia, quae illa arte effici possunt, a doctore 
tradantur.” It says there is not any art in which the teacher can show all 
of the things that can be done in that art. As Priscian says in the Pro-
hemio: “Nihil enim ex omni parte perfectum in humanis inventionibus 
esse posse credo.”16 Nothing, it says, I believe to be entirely perfect in 
human-made inventions. Cassiodorus, in book 2 of his epistles, chapter 
2: “unus satiare non valet omnium vota.”17 It is said, one cannot satisfy 
everyone. The Code of Law says in the title De veteri jure enucleando.L.2: 
“Omnium habere memoriam, et penitus in nullo peccare, divinitatis ma-
gis quam humanitatis est.” Having knowledge of everything, it says, and 
erring in nothing, is more divine than human.
cites here begins as follows: “Sed neque ex multitudine auctorum quod melius et aequius est 
iudicatote.” (Do not judge by the number of authors what is better and most equitable in 
the multitude of authors.) The Codex Justinianus (Codex of Justinian), published in 529 by 
order of the eastern emperor Justinian I (483–565 a.d.), was the first of the four books of the 
Corpus juris civilis (Body of Civil Law ). The other three books are the Digesta (The Digest of 
Justinian) and Institutiones (Institutes), both published in 533, and the Novellae constitutio-
nes post codicem (Novella—literally, “new constitutions”), which consisted of the laws that 
appear in the revised codex (534 a.d.).
15. The entire quotation is, “Indignor quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus; Verum 
opere longo fas est obrepere somnum” (Horace, Satires, Epistles and Ars poetica, 420; lines 
359–60). Quintus Horatius Flaccus, or Horace (65–8 b.c.), was a Roman poet who wrote 
extensively about love, friendship, and philosophy. The Ars poetica (c. 19 b.c.), or The Art of 
Poetry, is a book of literary theory that addresses several genres of literature, including poetry, 
drama, and tragedy. It consists of 476 lines, which include maxims for the benefit of young 
poets. Homer is the Greek author of two well-known epic poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey.
16. Priscianus Caesariensis was a fifth-century Latin grammarian who wrote Institutio-
nes Grammaticae (Institutes of grammar), which is a series of twenty books on Latin gram-
mar. The Prohemio refers to these books.
17. Flavius Magnus Aurelius Cassiodorus Senator (c. 490–c. 583 a.d.) was a Roman 
politician, an author, and a monk, who founded a monastery, Vivarium. The Varia epistolae 
(537 a.d.; The Letters of Cassiodorus) is a collection of more than 450 edicts and letters that 
Cassiodurus wrote as a politician (he served from 507 to 540 a.d.). Following his retire-
ment as a politician, he became a monk.

20 epIstle nunCupatory
No one can flee from the people who are jealous, as Valerius Maxi-
mus says in book 4 of Amore et dilectione: “Nulla tam modesta felicitas est, 
quae malignitatis dentes vitare possit.”18 There is no happiness so modest, 
it says, that it can flee from the teeth of evil. Quintilian says in the Dec-
lamationes, declamatione 12: “Quo non penetras, improbe livor? Quidve 
scabrae malignitati clausum est?”19 Where, wicked envy, do you fail to 
reach? Or what thing can be impervious to your harsh evil? As Matheus 
Vindocinensis says in the Ars Versificatoria, the second and final part, 
chapter 4: “Fascinat invidie spiritus omne bonum.”20 It says the spirit of 
jealousy makes everything good. Authors who compose literature usually 
dedicate it to men whose authority vindicates them from jealous detrac-
tors. If some authors do what I say for this reason, others may do it for 
another reason.
I, very Illustrious Lord, in accord with your most deserved title, should 
address you for many reasons. One, because of the kindness I received 
from your most Illustrious Lordship. Another, because of your abiding 
mentorship. Another reason, a main one, is because your Lordship is hon-
ored by such a great lineage and is such a generous person, who possesses 
many and unique virtues, as everyone knows, and who makes others wiser. 
I am certain that I will be safe under your protection, more than others, 
against the malevolent and envious gods, because the protection of your 
Lordship will be for these poisonous snakes an elixir from their designs, 
and for me a respite from their evil ways. And, for this reason, I plead that 
your Illustrious Lordship receive me soon, as if I were a former servant, 
remembering that great and consequential efforts, as Xerxes Longimano 
used to say, mean not focusing on how insignificant what is offered might 
be, but rather on the spirit with which it is offered.21
18. Valerius Maximus was a Latin author who was also a renowned rhetorician.
19. Marcus Fabius Quintilianus (35–96 a.d.), who was born in Spain, was a Latin rhet-
orician and educational theorist, and the author of Instituto oratoria (c. 95 a.d.; Institutes 
of Oratory), a twelve volume treatise on education. The Declamationes Maiores and Minores 
(Major and Minor Declamations), attributed to Quintilian, are lecture notes disseminated 
by one of his students.
20. Matheus Vindocinensis was a twelfth-century French author who wrote Ars Versif-
icatoria (art of poetry), a theoretical treatise on Latin versification.
21. Artaxerxes Longimano, the son of Xerxes I, was king of Persia from 465 b.c. until 
his death in 424 b.c.

BOOK I



 23
chapt
er 1
In which the game of chess as a game of science and 
mathematical invention is addressed
The game of chess, since it is a game of science and mathematical inven-
tion, consists of many parts. First, it is beneficial to know that chess is 
founded on two liberal arts, geometry and arithmetic. It is well known 
that it is designed to be played on a square, flat surface, and perfected like 
the number eight, which is a complete number according to those peo-
ple who know something. The number eight multiplied by itself equals 
sixty-four. So, imagine a flat, squared surface that has eight equal lines 
in longitude and latitude, and on each of these lines is eight points, like 
houses, equal in all respects, that form a flat, squared surface with sixty- 
four houses.1 It is obvious that it has its foundation on these two num-
bers, four and eight, whose meaning Macrobius expounds on in the first 
book of Somnium Scipionis.2 Second, because it is a game of science, with-
out any element of luck, all that takes place during the game is visible. 
According to Aristotle in the first book of Magnorum moralium, chapter 
27: “Scientia est eorum, quae sunt cum demonstratione.”3 It says science is 
one of those things that is demonstrable. All is positioned for demonstra-
1. The horizontal lines on the board are called ranks, and the vertical lines are called 
files.
2. Macrobius Ambrosius Theodosius (390–430 a.d.) was a philosopher and a Latin 
grammarian. Somnium Scipionis (The Dream of Scipio) is Macrobius’s commentary on Ci-
cero’s book of the same name, which was from De re publica (54–51 b.c.; On the Common-
wealth). Scipionis Aemilianus was a Roman general who commanded the Roman armies in 
the Third Punic War (149–146 b.c.) and Numantine War (143–133 b.c.). The numbers four 
and eight belong to Pythagorean numerolog y, which reveals certain concepts about human 
life (e.g., destiny number, personality number). According to this numerolog y, the number 
eight is closely associated with heavenly harmony and balance. The number four represents 
the four seasons and the four elements (earth, air, fire, and water). For more information 
about Somnium Scipionis and Pythagorean numerolog y, see Bächtold in the bibliography.
3. Aristotle (384–322 b.c.) was an ancient Greek philosopher who, in addition to serv-
ing as Alexander the Great’s tutor, was a prolific author of treatises on the sciences, litera-
ture, music, linguistics, and philosophy. Magnorum moralium (Great ethics) is one of Ar-
istotle’s several books on ethics. Aristotle’s words should read: “Scientiae vero eorum quae 
sunt cum demonstratione” (598a21).

24 BooK I
tion, as Macrobius says in the first book of Somnium Scipionis: “Facilior 
ad intelligendum per oculos via est, quam per sermonem.” It says it is eas-
ier to understand what is demonstrable than that which can be explained 
only in words. Third, to understand the game of chess well and perfectly 
requires all things encompassed in the other liberal arts. Even more help-
ful, it is beneficial to possess ingenuity, memory, an active imagination, a 
willingness to practice, and fondness for the game.
Since many people who play this game do not agree to these things, or, 
at least, do not concur at the time of learning them, these people cannot 
truthfully call themselves experts in this art. It would be similar to other 
arts in which there are many more people who are considered learned in 
name only and not in accomplishments. Without ingenuity or memory, 
one can be wise in a deleterious way. The active imagination, which one 
does not see, is necessary to create many inventions, and ingenuity makes 
them a reality and perfect. The truly learned chess players possess a greater 
number of these skills than the pseudo-learned chess player. As Hugo of 
Saint Victor says in book 3, chapter 4: “Principium a magistro, sed perfec-
tio ab ingenio, et exercitatione esse debet.”4 It says familiarity starts with 
the teacher, but perfection is obtained with ingenuity and practice. Sallust 
says: “Ubi intenderis ingenium, valet.”5 It says when you apply ingenuity, 
it prevails. Memory is necessary in this game, so that, as I said, all that we 
learn with the active imagination, memory will retain it, and ingenuity 
will refine and perfect it. In addition, since this game is played without 
knowing what will happen, memory here is very necessary.
As Tullius says in the second book of De naturum deorum: “Nihil 
est difficilius quam a consuetudine oculorum aciem mentis abducere.”6 
4. Hugh of Saint Victor (1096–1141) was a philosopher and scholastic theologian who 
wrote on mystic theolog y. This sentence, which is from Hugh of Saint Victor’s Didascalicon 
de studio legendi (Didascalicon: A Medieval Guide to the Arts), should read: “Etenim princip-
ium a magistro, perfectio autem debet esse ab ingenio et studio.”
5. Sallust, De coniuratione Catilinae, chapter 51. Gaius Sallustius Crispus (86–35 b.c.) 
was a Roman politician and historian who gives, in De coniuratione Catilinae (35–40 b.c.; 
The Conspiracy of Catiline), his account of Catiline’s attempt to overthrow the Roman Sen-
ate in 63 b.c., and, in Bellum iugurthinum (40 b.c.; The Jugurthine War), his account of the 
Roman conquest of Numidia, a kingdom on the North African coast, which began in 112 
b.c. and ended in 106 b.c.
6. Cicero, De naturum deorum (45 b.c.; On the Nature of the Gods), 2 . 17.

 BooK I                                                    25
It says there is nothing as difficult as separating the astuteness of under-
standing from everyday sight, because as the same author says in book 3, 
chapter 4 of Rhetorica ad Herennium: “Memoria est firma animi rerum 
et verborum dispositionis perceptio.”7 It says memory is a firm perception 
of the spirit’s disposition to things and words. Practice is necessary in all 
arts, and I believe there are few people who would not agree. As Vegeti-
us says in book 2, chapter 23 of De re militari: “Antiqua est prudensque 
sentential, omnes artes in meditatione consistere.”8 It says ancient and 
prudent judgment affirms that all of the arts require practice. Tullius says 
in book 3, chapter 12 of Rhetorica ad Herennium: “Exercitiis disciplina 
comparatur.”9 Discipline is the fruit of practice. In chapter 13, he says: “In 
omni disciplina infirma est artis praeceptio sine summa adsiduitate ex-
ercitationis.” It says in all disciplines, it does little good to know the art 
without practicing it. It is for this reason that Quintilian first said: “Plus 
confert exercitatio citra artem quam ars citra exercitationem.”10 Practice 
without art is more productive than art without practice. Boethius, in 
the first book of De disciplina scholarium says: “Sine usu scientia parum 
poterit: usus autem sine scientia multum.”11 Without practice, science is 
capable of little; without science, practice can achieve a lot. In order for it 
to be more beneficial and perfect, it should consist of erudite imitation: 
in other words, practice should take place with the most learned men of 
the respective art.
7. Cicero, Rhetoric: For Herrenius (c. 87 b.c.). The identity of Gaius Herrenius is un-
known.
8. Book 2, chapter 24. Publius Flavius Vegetius Renatus (d. fifth century) was a military 
expert and the author of De re militari (Concerning military matters), a treatise on Roman 
warfare and strategies. The source of all quotations attributed to Vegetius is De re militari 
(http://www.thelatinlibrary.com/vegetius.html).
9. This phrase concludes a sentence that reads: “Nihil est enim quod aut natura extre-
mum invenerit aut doctrina primum; sed rerum principia ab ingenio profecta sunt, exitus 
disciplina conparantur.” (For in invention nature is never last, education never first; rather 
the beginnings of things arise from natural talent, and the ends are reached by discipline.) 
Cicero, Rhetorica ad Herranium, trans. Caplan, 220–21.
10. Quintilian, Instituto oratoria (c. 95 a.d.; Institutes of Oratory), Book 12.
11. Anicius Manlius Severinus Boëthius (c. 475–c. 525 a.d.) was a Roman statesman, 
philosopher, and theologian who died as a Christian martyr. De disciplina scholarium (On 
the discipline of scholars) was falsely attributed to Boëthius. This sentence should read: 
“Scientia sine usu prodest parum, usus autem sine scientia prodest multum.”

26 BooK I
As Gaufridus de Vinosalvo says in chapter 98 of his poetry: “Rem tria 
perficiunt: ars, cujus lege regaris; Usus, quem serves; meliores, quos im-
iteris. Ars certos, usus promptos, imitatio reddit Artifices apto; tria con-
currentia summos.”12   It says there are three things that make anything 
perfect: art, whose rules you follow; practice, which ensures it; and the 
learned men, whom you imitate. The art imbues it with authority, prac-
tice brings it to life, and imitation transforms artifice into aptitude. The 
three together elevate science to its apex. I could list many more fruits 
that are the result of science, but there are so many that it would be inex-
cusable to name all of them.
Fondness is very necessary to obtain anything, and especially difficult 
things, because a person invests care in what he enjoys, thus making it 
easier, and diligent care overcomes any challenge. As Seneca says in book 
7, chapter 1 of the Epistulae morales ad Lucillium: “Nihil est quod non ex-
pugnet pertinax opera et intenta ac diligens cura.”13   There is nothing out 
of the reach of persistent work, effort, and diligent care. Terence in his 
play Heauton timorumenos (The Self-Tormentor) says: “Nulla est tam fac-
ilis res, quin difficilis siet, quam invitus facias.”14 It says there is nothing 
so easy that it is not made difficult if performed against one’s will. It is for 
this reason that Seneca says in book 7, chapter 8 of the Epistulae morales 
ad Lucillium: “da operam ne quid umquam invitus facias.” It says, work 
at nothing that is contrary to will. As Seneca says in De tranquillitate an-
imi: “Male respondent coacta ingenia.”15 It says ingenuity that is forced 
to do something it does not enjoy will not respond well. Furthermore, it 
is for this reason that Boethius says in De consolatione, book 4, chapter 3: 
12. Gaufridus de Vinosalvo is the author of Poetria nova (c. 1202), a two-thousand-line 
poem in hexameters that represented the new poetics of the Middle Ages.
13. Lucius Annaeus Seneca (4 b.c.–65 a.d.), who was born in Spain but raised in 
Rome, was a Roman Stoic philosopher, a playwright, an orator, and a politician. He was 
Nero’s tutor and later his advisor. When Seneca was implicated in a plot to assassinate Nero, 
he committed suicide. Epistulae morales ad Lucillium (c. 65 a.d.; Moral Letters to Lucilius) 
is a collection of 124 letters on moral issues that Seneca wrote to Lucilius, who was the proc-
urator of Sicily.
14. Publius Terentius Afer (c. 195–c. 159 b.c.) was a playwright who wrote six plays that 
exist today. This line is from act 4, scene 6.
15. De tranquillitate animi (c. 49–62 a.d.; On the Tranquility of the Mind) is a dialogue 
Seneca wrote to cure a friend’s fragile state of mind.

 BooK I                                                    27
“Duo sunt quibus omnis humanorum actuum constat effectus, voluntas 
sciliet ac potestas, quorum si alterutrum desit, nihil est quod explicari 
queat.”16   It says there are two things that influence human acts, and they 
are beneficial to know: will and power. If one were lacking, there is noth-
ing that can be explained.
That being said, these attributes are necessary to obtain this art. It 
is proven that this game is science and liberal invention. There are many 
other things that I could present to prove it if the list were not so long. 
Noting only one more thing, and it is that calculare in Latin means to 
compute and to reason, or to do it. And calculus means pebble, which ac-
countants used for this endeavor. Metaphorically speaking, therefore, the 
Latins described chess as a game of counting, and they called the pieces 
pebbles, as Ovid says: “Sive latrocini sub imagine calculus ibit, fac pereat 
vitreo miles ab hoste tuus.”17 And as Martial says in book 2 of the Epi-
grams: “calculus hic gemino discolor hoste perit.”18
chapter 2
In which the game of chess and laudable pastime, 
which is not just an indulgence but is necessary for the 
conservation of human life, is addressed
The praiseworthy games not only were, but must be, permitted because 
they are necessary for the conservation of human life. As Aristotle says 
in book 10, chapter 5 of Ethicas: “Omnia habentia corpora no possunt 
continue operari.” It says all things that have a body cannot work con-
16. De consolatione philosophiae (c. 524 a.d.; The Consolation of Philosophy) is a dialogue 
between Boëthius and Philosophy, which he personifies as a woman. He wrote this dialogue 
while in prison, awaiting execution for his Christian faith.
17. “When in the Soldier-game your marbles go, / See your man falls before his glassy 
foe” (Wilkinson, Ovid Recalled, 129). In Book 2 of Ars amatoria (The Art of Love), Ovid in-
structs the man how to keep a woman. In addition to allowing her to win any competition, 
he recommends that the man approve her words and deny whatever she denies.
18. The entire quotation, which L
ópe
z repeats at the end of chapter 8, is: “Hic mihi bis 
seno numerator tessera puncto: calculus hic gemino discolor hoste perit” (Martial, 14.17); 
“On this side of me dice are counted by double sixes: on this other the piece of hostile colour 
is taken by twin foeman” (Martial, The Complete Works, 3350).

28 BooK I
tinuously. He also says in chapter 9: “Videtur requies et ludus in vita esse 
necessarium.” It says it is evident that rest and games are necessary in life. 
Aristotle says in book 8, chapter 1 of the Politica: “Laborans indigent re-
quiei. Ludus gratia requiei est.”19 He who works, it says, has a need for 
rest, and games provide rest. Seneca, De tranquillitate animi: “Danda est 
remissio animis, meliores, acrioresque requieti surgent; nascitur ex assi-
duitate laborum animorum hebetatio quaedam et languor.” It says it is 
advantageous to give the mind a break; the rested begin the day better 
and stronger, because continuous work breeds sickness and dulls ingenui-
ty and energy. Cassiodorus in book 5, chapter 10: “incerta est vita eorum, 
qui nimia fatigatione lassantur.”20   It says the life of those who work too 
much is uncertain. Consequently, Ovid says in book 1 of Ponto: “Otia 
corpus alunt: animus quoque pascitur illis: inmodicus contra carpit ut-
rumque labor.”21 It says free time and pastimes nurture and sustain the 
body, and they also satisfy and delight the soul. By contrast, too much 
work consumes both the soul and the body. Honest and praiseworthy 
games have many benefits, and many more that I could discuss. They are 
important to the conservation of human life because they allow the body 
to alleviate itself from continuous work and, consequently, the mind ex-
periences delight. In this way gratified, a person begins the day better, 
stronger, and sharper.
Among many games, chess in particular is more effective than any 
other in many ways. First, because it is a game of science and seems not 
to be a dishonest pastime. As Facetus says: “Ocia nullus amet nisi sint 
coniuncta labori.”22 It says there is no one who loves pastimes if not en-
19. Politica (335–323 b.c.; Politics) is a treatise that consists of eight books in which 
Aristotle expounds on political theory, noting, particularly, the symbiotic relationship 
between politics and a community’s citizenry. Politics, for example, engenders virtue in 
citizens.
20. Varia epistolae (537 a.d.; The Letters of Cassiodorus).
21. Epistulae ex Ponto (Letters from the Black Sea) consists of four books of poetry that 
Ovid addressed to friends and enemies during his exile from Rome. Emperor Augustus ex-
iled Ovid to Tomis (modern day Constantia, Romania) in 8 a.d., perhaps as punishment 
for the scandalous content of Ars amatoria (c. 2 a.d.; The Art of Love).
22.  Facetus  is  the  name  of  an  imaginary  writer  who  is  credited  as  the  author  of  
twelfth-century books of poetry on morality. This tradition of courtesy literature began 
with the poem titled “Facetus de moribus et vita” (A fine man in habits and life).

 BooK I                                                    29
gaged in work because too much rest torments a person. The second, be-
cause, as the author of the book De formula honestae vitae, chapter 2, says, 
it is necessary to combine honest and calm games with work, and may 
they not be a detriment to a person’s dignity.23 What can be more hon-
est and proper to the dignity of any noble person because its invention 
is art and efficiency, and has much grace, ability, and charm? The third, 
because chess is a game permitted by law and approved as excellent. Those 
games that are not permitted by law and approved as excellent should not 
be called games, and rightly so, as the law of digests in the proem says: 
“Quis ludos appellat eos, ex quibus crimina dicuntur?”24 It says, who be-
lieves games also consist of those activities that are considered criminal? 
In the title ad.I.Aquili.I: “Nam ludus noxius in culpa est.” The pernicious 
game is guilty. The fourth, because it has provided us, the learned men, 
great philosophers, and others, an excellent life and much joy in playing 
it. Seneca says: Latrunculis ludimus, we play chess. Valerius Maximus 
considers Scaevola an excellent man and great jurist: “Calculis interdum 
vacasse dicitur, cum bene ac diu iura civium et caerimonias deorum or-
dinasset.”25 Valerius says about Scaevola that he would play at dice and 
games, when he had first dispatched the business of the commonwealth 
prosperously and the affairs of religion wisely.
What I have said, and other things I could say, can be proven to be 
praiseworthy and honest among games that are permitted and necessary, 
but this game of chess is the best and most decent of them all. It is for this 
reason that my spirit inspired me to compose this treatise about chess, 
that is, about this liberal invention. I did not begin by calling it a game 
because this term, ludus, which means game, is common in the liberal 
arts. We call the study of literature ludus literarius, and each science, like 
ludus grammaticus, the same. Without further delay, to those people who 
23. The author of De formulae honestae vitae (c. 570 a.d.; Rules for an Honest Life) is St. 
Martin of Braga (520–79 a.d.).
24. The Digesta seu Pandectae (533 a.d.; The Digest of Justinian; also known as Pandects) 
is a compendium of fifty books on Roman law published in 529 by order of the eastern em-
peror Justinian I (483–565 a.d.). It is the second of the four books of the Corpus Juris Civilis 
(Body of Civil Law). The quotation should read as follows: “Quis enim ludos appellet eos, ex 
quibus criminal oriuntur” (Dahlberg, Spacing Law and Politics, 14 0).
25. Quintus Mucius Scaevola was a Roman politician in the second century b.c.

30 BooK I
would like to know what they are about, I refer them to Latin literature, 
which deals with Cornucopia, Calepino, and other authors.26
chapter 3
In which the identity of the inventor  
of this game is addressed
The identity of the person who discovered this ingenious invention of 
a game is a source of debate among authors, who have diverse opinions 
about the subject. Some say the Moors were the inventors, because they 
played the game often and still do today. And it is said that they play by 
memory, all the while walking, but there is no solid testimony to prove 
it, because it is false. The game was played long before the Moors played 
it. Others say that two Greek brothers named Lydus and Tyrrhenus in-
vented it, who, bothered by a great hunger, devised the game in order to 
pass the time.27 Damiano, in his book, however, discounts this opinion 
as either a fable or a dream.28 It appears that their father Atys was forced 
to divide his town because of the sterility and hunger from which it suf-
fered. Leaving it to chance to determine which of these two sons would 
remain in the town and which would go somewhere else, Lydus remained 
as the successor of the kingdom and Tyrrhenus departed, taking with 
him the majority of the people. He traveled to Italy and populated the 
territory that became known as Tyrrhenia, and later, Tuscany.29
Other men of greater authority affirm that the Greek Palamedes, who 
was an industrious man who invented many things, invented the game 
of chess during the siege of Troy.30 Servius, a commentator of Virgil, says 
26. Cornucopia is the title of Nicholas Perotti’s book (1478) about Martial that consists 
of commentary and a dictionary. Ambrogio Calepino (1435–1511) incorporated Perotti’s 
book into his Latin dictionary (1502).
27. In Greek mytholog y, Lydus and Tyrrhenus were the sons of Atys, who was the king 
of Lydia (modern day Turkey). Lydus succeeded Atys as king.
28. Pedro Damiano (1470–1544) is the author of the first modern chess book, Questo li-
bro e da imparare giocare a scachi et de li partiti (1512; This book is to learn how to play chess). 
Ruy L
ópez corrects in his treatise what he believes to be the many problems with Damiano’s 
way to play chess.
29. Tuscany’s coastline is on the Tyrrhenian Sea.
30. In Greek mytholog y, Palamedes participated in the Greeks’ siege of Troy. His 

 BooK I                                                    31
that he [Servius] invented tabula lusoria, which by another name is called 
latruncularia.31 This name is based on latrunculos, the name the Romans 
used to describe the pieces, which we will address later. Chess was played 
on this tabula lusoria, and with respect to the boards we discuss, one 
game on each part, similar to what is seen and used today in Castile and 
Portugal.32 Francesco Filelfo, a learned man of our time, shares the same 
opinion.33 Calepino, author of the Cornucopia, and many other authors 
concur that this tabla lusoria and latruncularia are one and the same. The 
poet Martial, who played board games, including chess, calls the board 
tabula lusoria in book 2 of his epigrams. Later, he describes what it was 
used for, saying: “Hic mihi bis seno numerator tessera puncto: calculus 
hic gemino discolor hoste perit.” It says on this board one can play board 
games, including chess. This belief does not appear to be far from the 
truth, because according to it the game is a military invention, which we 
will discuss later. The author of the chronicle of the ages, Jacobus de Ces-
solis, and many other authors assert that the inventor of the game was an 
oriental philosopher, named Xerxes by the Chaldeans and Philometor by 
the Greeks, who says: “Mensurae vel iustitiae amator.”34 A lover of moder-
ation or of justice, about which we will speak later when it pertains to the 
reason for the invention of this game. Now, let us speak about when and 
where chess was invented.
ability to command the Greeks in battle was a source of envy to Odysseus and Diomedes, 
the other leaders of the Greeks.
31. Maurus Servius Honoratus was an early fifth-century grammarian who is the author 
of commentaries on Virgil titled In tria Virgilii opera expositio.
32. The tabula lusoria was a rectangular board made of wood or marble. Dice and chess 
were two of the board games Romans played, especially soldiers when they were not engaged 
in battle.
33.  Francesco  Filelfo  (1398–1481)  was  an  Italian  humanist  who  was  well  known  
throughout Italy for his acute intellect. He is the author of letters, speeches, satires, and 
Latin translations from the Greek.
34. The chronicle of the ages is a reference to St. Isidore of Seville’s Chronica maiora 
(c. 615). St. Isidore of Seville (560–636), who was the archbishop of Seville for nearly thirty-sev-
en years, is also the author of treatises on theolog y, history, natural science, and cosmolog y. 
Pope Clement VIII, who was the vicar of Christ from 1592 to 1605, canonized St. Isidore in 
1598. Chaldeans were inhabitants of Chaldea, a nation that existed between the tenth centu-
ry and the sixth century b.c. Philometor, which means “mother-loving,” was a common royal 
epithet among Hellenistic kings. Jacobus de Cessolis refers to Xerxes as Philometor, Xerxes’s 
Greek name, throughout his Liber de moribus hominum et officiis nobilium super ludo scaccho-
rum (1330, Book of the customs of men and the duties of nobles, or the book of chess).

32 BooK I
chapter 4
In which when and where this game  
was invented is explained
If we follow the belief that the inventor of chess was Palamedes, it is well 
known that he invented it in the time of the Trojan War, during the siege 
of Troy, so that soldiers during peace times did not occupy themselves 
with immoral activities; but instead focused on military matters to keep 
the mind sharp; and trained in the subtleties of defeating their enemies. 
If we accept the other belief that the inventor was the philosopher Xerx-
es, it is of interest to know that chess was invented in the city of Babylon 
during the reign of Amel-Marduk, the son of Nebuchadnezzar II, who 
was known as Evil-Merodach; 3,400 years after the creation of the world; 
560 years before the coming of Christ, our Savior of the world; 600 years 
after the destruction of Troy; and 192 years after the establishment of 
Rome, when Servius Tullius was ruling, sixth king of Rome, in the twen-
tieth year of his reign, which lasted 34 years; in the fifty-fourth Olympics; 
235 years before Alexander the Great; 27 years after the capture of the He-
brews during the time of Jeconiah Neri Hebrew, father of Salathiel.35 The 
preceding is in accordance with the true and correct chronography of the 
ancient and most verifiable authors.
35. Amel-Marduk (581–560 b.c.) succeeded his father Nebuchadnezzer II as king of 
Babylon and reigned from 562–560 b.c. Nebuchadnezzer II (634–562 b.c.) was the king 
of Babylon from 605–562 b.c. Servius Tullius was the king of Rome from 575–535 b.c. Ac-
cording to Spanish historian Enrique Fl
ór
ez, the fifty-fourth Olympiad would have been in 
the year 563 b.c., shortly before the reign of Amel-Marduk began. Jeconiah was the king of 
Judah until the king of Babylon dethroned him in the sixth century b.c. and imprisoned 
him for thirty-seven years. Shealtiel was born during Jeconiah’s time in exile (Fl
órez, Es-
paña sagrada, 2 : 2 2 9).

 BooK I                                                    33
chapter 5
In which the reason that the game was  
invented is explained
If we continue to believe that Xerxes was the inventor of chess, then we 
also believe that the game was invented for three reasons. The first and 
main reason was a desire for this game to correct Amel Evil-Merodach of 
his cruelties and bad lifestyle, and to satisfy the people of Babylon what 
he had promised them to the peril of his life. A further reason was to 
avoid the king’s reprimand; for the king might order Xerxes’s death, as 
he had done to so many others who had wanted to correct him. In this 
way, Xerxes reduced everything to the mind and invented this game in 
the shape of a war, as we will discuss later. Once invented, he began to 
tell others about it and to play with many gentlemen, captains, and im-
portant men. Since the game was pleasing to everyone who had played it, 
the king, surprised at the beauty of the game and the novelty of that un-
usual recreation, wanted to learn how to play it. The philosopher told the 
king that he could not learn how to play chess if he did not first commit 
himself to be a disciple of it.36 The king, pleased to want to learn how to 
play, became a disciple. Then, the philosopher, having the time the king 
needed, taught him the board’s shape and meaning, and, with respect to 
the pieces, showed him the properties of each one.
Beginning with the king, Xerxes taught him the moves and all of the 
virtues a good king should possess, about which we will speak later in the 
chapter when we address the king. He also showed him the properties and 
moves of the queen, about which we will speak more when it is time. In 
a similar way, he spoke about the rest of the pieces and the pawns, repri-
manding the king’s bad life as if he were reprimanding a third person. It is 
said that the king, who until this moment had put to death many wise men 
who had the temerity to reprove him, understood the philosopher’s correc-
tions and said to him, under penalty of losing his life, that he tell him why 
this game had been invented and who persuaded him to do it. The philos-
36. Philosopher is a reference to Xerxes.

34 BooK I
opher responded: “Oh, my king and lord, I desire to see your glorious life, 
which I cannot see if you were not in love with your people and endowed 
with all of the good virtues that you first possessed so that quickly and 
affably you could teach others to exercise them. It is unfair for someone 
who cannot command, or knows not how, to rule others, because there 
are reasons why violent empires do not last. It is for this purpose that my 
concern has been your education. The people ask me to correct you, and I 
promised that I would, although I feared death after I saw how you put to 
death other wise men who had dared to rebuke you. I looked for any way I 
could to find a friendly way to correct you, to preserve my life, and to sat-
isfy the people. With this great concern, I invented this game so that dis-
creetly I could do what I said and improve your life as if I were correcting 
a third person. I showed this game to everyone so that it would grab your 
attention and you would wish to learn how to play it. In this way, I could 
educate you discreetly.” In this way, the philosopher fulfilled his wish with 
this delicate invention, which is certainly worthy of such a result.
The second reason for the invention of this game was to f lee from 
pernicious leisure, which results in serious evils because it is the cause 
of many vices. Ovid says: “Otia si tollas, periere Cupidinis arcus.”37   It 
means if you flee from idleness, love’s bows will perish. Quintilian says: 
“Ad omne votum fluente fortuna lascivit otium,” which means idleness 
disgraces anything it wants.38 And for this reason, Seneca says: “Otium 
sine literis mors est et hominis vivi sepultura.”39 It means that idleness 
without letters is death and the burial of the living man.
The third reason for the invention of this game was that everyone nat-
urally wants to know and to hear new things. Seneca says in book 4 of 
Civilium causarum in prophetiae: “ad nova homines concurrunt, ad nova 
conveniunt.”40 Men, it says, participate in new things, and they gath-
37. Remedia Amoris (The Cures for Love), v. 139.
38. Declamationes Maiores (Major Declamations), 3.12.
39. Epistulae morales ad Lucillium 82.3.
40. The quotation that L
ópe
z cites here is from book 4.1 of Seneca’s Controversiae, a 
collection of ten books of declamations that prepared students for legal oratory. The correct 
quotation reads as follows: “ad nova homines concurrunt, ad nota non veniunt” (men flock 
to the new, avoid the old; Seneca, Controversiae, trans. Winterbottom, 423).

 BooK I                                                    35
er around new things, as if to say, men go to new things quickly. Pliny 
in book 12, chapter 3 of Naturalis Historia says: “Est natura hominum 
novitatis avida.”41 It means the nature of man is covetous of new things. 
Consequently, Xerxes decided to act and invented this game for many 
admirable reasons. He obtained fame and glory among mortals for the 
characteristics of war that it has and for an abundance of reasons.
Note. The game was designed as a war so that the king could demon-
strate how to protect his subjects and citizens. The king believed, howev-
er, there was little need for subjects and citizens in times of peace, until 
he learned that they would be readily available and obedient whenever 
necessary if he treated them justly and with love. As Macrobius says in 
book 2, chapter 18: “Necesse est multos timeat quem multi timent.”42 It 
says it is necessary that he who is feared by many, fear many. As Isidore 
says in Sinonima Soliloquies, book 2, chapter 45: “Subiecti plus te rever-
eantur quam metuant: plus tibi officio dilectionis, quam conditionis ne-
cessitate adhaereant.”43 It says, may the subjects respect you more than 
they fear you, and they will support you more with love as their purpose 
than out of necessity because of their subjugation. Later he says: “Talem 
te redde subditis ut magis ameris quam timearis.”44 Show yourself in this 
way to your subjects, and you will be more loved than feared, including 
in war, because, as Vegetius says in book 3, chapter 10 of De re militari: 
“Quis autem dubitet artem bellicam rebus omnibus esse potiorem, per 
quam libertas retinetur et dignitas, propagantur provinciae conseruator 
imperium.” Whoever doubted, it says, that the art of war was better than 
all other things. For by it, freedom is maintained, the dignity of the prov-
ince increases, and the empire is preserved. It does not behoove the king 
(if he wants to save himself and his kingdom) to be cruel. As Seneca says: 
41. Pliny the Elder (23–79 a.d.) was a Roman author, military commander, and philos-
opher, whose Naturalis Historia (77–79 a.d.; Natural History) is an encyclopedic portrait 
of the world; it consists of thirty-seven books about topics that range from the arts to the 
sciences.
42. Saturnaliorum Libri Septem (the seven books of Saturnalia), named for the ancient 
Roman festival that is the setting for Macrobius’s exposition of Roman culture, consists of 
dialogues between learned men who discuss an encyclopedic variety of topics.
43. The Soliloquies, also known as Synonyms or Lamentation of the Soul.
44. Soliloquies 2 .76.

36 BooK I
“Nemo potest terribilis esse secure.”45 It says: No terrible man can be safe. 
As it says in Ecclesiasticus, chapter 8: “Noli esse sicut leo in domo tua ever-
tens domesticos tuos et opprimens subiectos tibi.”46 You do not want to 
be in your house like the lion, who destroys your household and oppresses 
your subjects. I leave out many other examples in order to abbreviate.
chapt
er 6
In which the reasons there were sixty-four squares, 
a square board, and elevated sides for the game of 
chess are explained
Jacobus de Cessolis says that there were sixty-four squares and a square 
board because the philosopher inventor of this game wanted the shape 
of the board to represent the city of Babylon, and the pieces to represent 
the king, the nobility, and the non-nobility. This city was very wide and 
squared, and there were four parts, each of which measured sixteen thou-
sand steps in length and width, divided into sixty-four squares.47 Cesso-
lis continues in this way: Babylon had four squares, sixty-four thousand 
steps in length and width. This information, he says, was approved by the 
authority of St. John; I cannot find where it says St. John of Babylon, but 
the one of Jerusalem says that each square had no more than twelve thou-
sand steps.48 I believe the philosopher, who alluded to the number sixteen 
45. Epistulae morales ad Lucillium
46. Ecclesiasticus 4:35–36. Latin Vulgate Bible. L
ópe
z cites the reference incorrectly, a 
mistake he will repeat.
47. Murray states that the sixty-four squares of the chessboard “agree with the tradi-
tional shape of the city, which was four-square and 16 miles each way” (A History of Chess, 
615). Caxton asserts a similar equivalency: “And in one of the corners of this cyte [city] was 
made a toure treangle [triangular tower] as a shelde [shield] whereof the heyght [height] 
extended unto the lengthe of .vii. thousand paas [steps]/ whiche is .vii. myle [miles] English” 
(The Game and the Playe of Chesse, 159).
48. Cessolis cites only the description of St. Jerome: “Jerome says that Babylon was a 
large, quartered city—each quarter measuring 16,000 paces in length and width. A thou-
sand paces constitute one mile. Thus, since four times sixteen makes sixty-four, the total 
perimeter of each city quarter measured sixty-four Lombard miles. The clever philoso-
pher Xerxes, who invented the game, put as many squares on the board as there were miles 
around the city quarters.” Jacobus de Cessolis, The Book of Chess, trans. and ed. H. L. Wil-
liams (New York: Italica Press, 2008).

 BooK I                                                    37
on which he founded this invention, as we expressed in chapter 1, and 
not to the city of Babylon, because this number, deduced from its mul-
tiplication of eight times eight, amounts to and constitutes this number 
of sixty-four, and this number constitutes a perfect square, as we express 
above on authority of Macrobius.49   In addition, this board represents a 
field where two kings come to do battle, instead of a city. It seems he al-
luded to the square military formation, which is very useful, as Vegetius 
shows us in book 1 of De re militari, title 26: “Tertio pracipiendum, ut 
quadratam aciem repente constituant.” Third precept, he says, is the sol-
diers are formed and organized with the army in a square.
The elevated sides represent, according to the same Jacobus de Ces-
solis, the walls of the aforementioned city, which were very high for the 
decorum and beauty of it, and for the safety of its inhabitants. It seems to 
me, however, to represent more the trenches and battlements of the two 
kings than the walls. In this way, the two camps are safer because of the 
trenches. With those high edges, we are able to contain better the pieces 
so that they do not fall off of the board. The edges represent in all parts a 
closed and fortified battlefield, and where the soldiers enter the skirmish 
remains open from wherever they enter the battle.
chapt
er 7
In which the meaning of the board’s thirty-two 
squares is explained
The thirty-two squares on the board, says the same Jacobus de Cessolis, 
are empty because whoever takes as his charge to rule and to govern peo-
ple not only populates the city and republic in which they live, but also 
occupies enough lands and possessions for the people to inhabit and to 
cultivate, where they can sustain their life and serve their king. The king-
doms and lands without places where the people can nourish themselves 
and where they can spread out are more appropriately called bandits’ dens 
49. López distances his interpretation of chess from the allegorical imaginings of Ces-
solis and expresses it in terms of liberal arts, such as, in this case, mathematics.

38 BooK I
than kingdoms. Consequently, the squares, or the unoccupied parts on 
this board, represent the boundaries and width of this city. I do not look 
at it in the same way as I do the rest, because as I have said, the board 
does not represent a city but a battlefield with two armies. The one part 
consists of the people of both parts, and the other is empty, where one can 
enter the skirmish.50
There were some other squares that remained empty for two reasons. 
One, if there were more, or less, there could not be a square. The other 
reason, because one part like the other has an equal number of pawns 
that can be used to occupy the squares. In order for them not to take away 
the space of the rest of the pieces, it was necessary for the pawns to navi-
gate three squares from the first move so that the pieces could move there 
later. Furthermore, the pawns are like the cavalry because, in addition to 
attacking, they hide the movements of their own army from the foe, as 
Vegetius shows us in book 3 of De re militari, title 14, saying: “Singuli 
autem armati in directum ternos pedes inter se occupare consueuerunt, 
hoc est, in mille passibus mille sescenti sexaginta sex pedites ordinantur 
in longum, ut nec acies interluceat et spatium sit arma tractandi; inter 
ordinem autem et ordinem a tergo in latum sex pedes distare uoluerunt, 
ut haberent pugnantes spatium accedendi atque recedendi; uehementius 
enim cum saltu cursuque tela mittuntur.”51   It says each one of the war-
riors in the fight occupies, as a custom, a space three feet from each other, 
and it is good to know, in 1,000 steps, there are 1,666 soldiers.52 Those sol-
diers who situate themselves on foot in their places are in a position to be 
able to move to help one another and to obstruct the enemy’s view of the 
soldiers behind them. With respect to weapons, the soldiers wanted there 
to be a distance of six feet between the front order and the order in the 
back, so that those who fought had space to attack and to withdraw, be-
cause the weapons with the greatest force are launched high and quickly.
50. The “empty part” refers to the four middle ranks.
51. The pawn moves similarly today, but unlike the phraseolog y of the Middle Ages, 
which counted a piece’s beginning square in its move count, the pawn may move two 
squares according to modern chess rules.
52. Each step is five feet; 5000 ÷ 3 = 1666.

 BooK I                                                    39
chapter 8
In which the names of chess and the  
pieces are explained
Chess is called the board formed by eight lines, which we said above, and 
sixty-four squares. Among the Spanish people, it is called Axedrez because, 
according to some people, the philosopher Xerxes was its inventor, and by 
modifying and corrupting the name, moving letters, and replacing “s” for 
“d,” according to how some people write it, xerses, and according to others, 
xerxes, in which case the “x” replaces the “d.” In order to say that there 
was a name axerses, xerses would have to be written physically, explaining 
that it was modified and deduced from this name xerses. The Italians call 
it Scacherio, from its name in Latin, because scacherio means nothing more 
than a repository of items that is situated and prepared for battle. I believe 
it is from the Latin calculus, because, as Calepino says, what the Latins call 
calculus, the Italians call scachus. Because, as we will discuss later, it is said 
that calculus comes from the verb calculo, which means to count. Some 
people say seacho is an appropriate Venetian verb, which means a stone for 
counting, because it is an imitation of what accountants used to count in 
the past. Among the Venetians, scisar is to count according to the calcula-
tion of chess, which can be seen in modern arithmetic.
According to the Latins, the board is called tabula latruncularia and 
the game ludus latruncularia or latronum ludus, and the pieces are called 
latrones, latrunculus in their diminutive form. Since this game was a mil-
itary invention, the pieces were called by these names, which mean ban-
dits or thieves, because they advance like armed bandits in an ambush 
where they overtake their enemies. Also, because the purpose of men of 
war is to ambush in order to rob their enemies, according to Virgil, who 
tells us: “Convectare juvat praedas, et vivere rapto.”53 It means that raids 
and living off of theft bring pleasure to people of war. It’s better to call 
53. Publius Vergilius Maro (70–19 b.c.) was a Roman poet whose three most well-
known poems are Eclogae (Eclogues or Bucolics), Georgica (Georgics), and Aeneis (Aeneid). 
These words can be found in the Aeneid, book 7, line 749.

40 BooK I
them calculos, which means in Spanish trebejos [pieces], because it comes 
from calculo, the verb calculas.
As I have already said, people counted with those little rocks in the 
past, coupling them with reason and mindfulness of the count so as not 
to forget and make a mistake. As a result, the pieces show that it is a game 
of counting, as we said above. It should be noted that it is called in this 
way, as we have said. Martial in book 2 of the epigrams: “Insidiosorum 
si ludis bella latronum, gemmeus iste tibi miles et hostis.”54   It says if you 
play this game, that it is like a war of bandits who set up an ambush; this 
instrument of glass or something else that shines may serve you as a sol-
dier or as an enemy. Ovid: “Sive latrocini sub imagine calculus ibit, fac 
pereat vitreo miles ab hoste tuus.”55 Martial: “Hic mihi bis seno numera-
tor tessera puncto: calculus hic gemino discolor hoste perit.” I do not put 
here the names of the other provenances, because neither is it my inten-
tion nor was it a thing to do, because it would never end.
chapter 9
In which the name, shape, and position of  
each of the pieces are explained
There are eight pieces, and the main one is called the king, in whose for-
tune or misfortune consists winning or losing the game. The second piece 
is called the queen or lady or donna in Italian. The pieces that are clos-
est to these pieces are called bishops; one bishop for the king and another 
bishop for the queen, or lady. After these pieces are others, one on one 
side and another on the other side, and they are called knights. The one 
that is next to the king is called the king’s knight, and the one that is next 
to the queen is called the queen’s knight. Behind these pieces are another 
54. “If your game is the warfare of insidious robbers, you have here in precious stones both 
your soldiers and your enemy” (Martial, The Epigrams, 607).The second half of the epigram 
does not appear in the original text, but I include it here because it complements the first half.
55. “When in the Soldier-game your marbles go, / See your man falls before his glassy 
foe” (Wilkinson, Ovid Recalled, 129). In book 2 of Ars amatoria (The Art of Love), Ovid in-
structs the man how to keep a woman. In addition to allowing her to win any competition, 
he recommends that the man approve her words and deny whatever she denies.

 BooK I                                                    41
two, one on the side of the king in the last square called the king’s rook, 
and another in the last square on the side of the queen called the q u e e n’ s 
rook. In the second rank in front of these pieces are another eight pieces 
called the pawns, and each one is called a pawn for the piece behind it.
Finished with the name and position of each piece, because what we 
say about one side is understood for the other side, there is no difference 
except in color to distinguish which pieces belong to one side and which 
pieces belong to the other side. With respect to the shape, it is useful to 
know that there is no specific and common shape now, because in some 
locations they are made one way and in other places another way. Al-
though the pieces are unique because of their different shapes, with re-
spect to the pawns, almost all of them are as one. In every location, pawns 
are made the same way, one pawn is no different than the other, I say. 
With respect to the other pieces, there are differences according to how 
each person wishes to make them. Regardless of how one wishes to make 
them, it is better to make all of them in their own shape, according to 
their role, which is how it was done in the past. Since it is no longer the 
case (because everyone makes them economically), I will no longer linger 
on this topic, but I will move on to declaring how they were made in the 
past, dedicating a separate chapter to a description of each one. I will only 
say here what Jacobus de Cessolis says, that Xerxes, the inventor of this 
game, made each piece from gold and silver, imitating human shape.56 It 
is very credible because it would have been easier with that shape to cap-
ture the attention of the king to their purpose. The Romans made them 
with glass or from another shiny material, as Ovid shows in saying: “Sive 
latrocinii sub imagine calculus ibit, fac pereat vitreo miles ab hoste tu-
us.”57 Martial said: “Vitreo latrone.”58 And again: “Insidiosorum si ludis 
bella latronum, gemmeus iste tibi miles et hostis.”59
56. Liber de moribus hominum et officiis nobilium super ludo scacchorum (1330; Book of 
the customs of men and the duties of nobles, or the book of chess).
57. Book 2 of Ars amatoria. “When in the Soldier-game your marbles go, / See your 
man falls before his glassy foe” (Wilkinson, Ovid Recalled, 1 2 9).
58. Epigrams 7.72. “Glass thief.” Martial refers to a glass gaming piece.
59. Epigrams 14.18. “If your game is the warfare of insidious robbers, you have here in 
precious stones both your soldiers and your enemy” (Martial, The Epigrams, 6 0 7).

42 BooK I
chapter 10
In which the shape, position, and movement  
of the king are explained
Since the king is the most important piece, as we have said already, it 
is appropriate to begin with him because he is the lord of victory or of 
the contrary. Its shape was this way: in human form, placed on a royal 
chair, dressed in purple, which was a royal wardrobe, with a crown on 
his head, and in his right hand a scepter and in his left hand a round ball. 
The crown on his head represented dignity, which he has over all others 
because royal dignity is the glory of the people. The king’s life is such, that 
the eyes of everyone are focused on him in order to follow his movements 
and obey his commands. As the Ecclesiasticus says in chapter 10: “Qualis 
est rector civitatis, tales et inhabitantes in ea.”60 As is the rector of the 
city, so are its inhabitants. The purple shows that the king must shine 
over all with grace and virtue. As elegant clothing embellishes the body, 
in the same way virtue beautifies the intellect and the soul. As Philon 
says in the Book of Wisdom, chapter 6: “Rex sapiens populi stabilimentum 
est.”61 As Seneca says in chapter 3 of the tragedy of Thyestes: “Ubi non est 
pudor, nec cura iuris, sanctitas, pietas, fides; instabile regnum est.”62 As 
Cassiodorus says in book 3, chapter 12 of his epistles: “Facilius est quippe, 
si dicere fas est, errare, naturam quam dissimilem sui princeps possit for-
mare rem publicam.”63
The scepter in the right hand symbolizes the scepter of justice and 
rigor that must be applied equally to everyone. As it says in the Ecclesias-
60. Ecclesiasticus 10:2.
61. Philon refers to Philo of Alexandria. Sapientiae (Book of Wisdom) 6:26: “and a wise 
king is the upholding of the people.”
62. “Where there is no shame, no care for right, no honour, righteousness, faith—there 
sovereignty is unstable” (Schiesaro, Passions in Play, 160). Thyestes (62   a.d.) is a Roman re-
venge tragedy about a Greek mythological character, Thyestes, whose rivalry with his twin 
brother, Atreus, to be king of Mycenae culminates in a banquet at which Atreus murders his 
nephews and serves their heads to their father.
63. “It is easier, if one may say so, for Nature herself to make a mistake than it is for a 
Sovereign to make a State unlike to himself ” (Cassiodorus, The Letters, 167).

 BooK I                                                    43
ticus, chapter 19: “Qui potestatem sibi assumit iniuste odietur.”64 Grego-
ry in Pastora, chapter 18: “Sit rector bene agentibus per humilitatem so-
cius, contra dilenquentium vitia per zeleum iustitiae erectus.”65 Sallust in 
Cata: “Labore atque iustitia res publica crevit vit.”66 And Cassiodorus in 
book 4, epistle 12: “Semper auget principes obseruata iustitia.”67  It is ben-
eficial to know that as mercy and truth protect the king, in the same way 
clemency affirms his throne. Solomon in Proverbs, chapter 20: “Miseri-
cordia et veritas custodiunt regem et roboratur clementia thronus eius.”68 
Tullius in the second chapter of the Philippics: “Charitate et benevolentia 
civium saeptum oportet esse, non armis.”69 The ball in the left hand sym-
bolizes that the king must oversee the entire kingdom’s administration, 
and he and his officials should ensure that it is administered well and 
with justice. Many things could be said about this subject, but, in the in-
terest of brevity, I will not continue. The preceding information is about 
the king’s image and form.
With respect to its position, it is useful to know that the king is given 
the fourth square [e1], which is the middle, meaning that it is appropriate 
for the king to be in the middle of the others, administering justice and 
64. “Whoever pretend to authority is hated” (Ecclesiasticus 20:8). The source of all bib-
lical translations in English is the Catholic Study Bible.
65. “The ruler should be, through humility, a companion of good livers, and, through 
the zeal of righteousness, rigid against the vices of evil-doers” (Gregory, Pastoral Rule, 30). 
Pope St. Gregory the Great is the author of Regula Pastoralis (c. 590 a.d.; Pastoral Care), 
a treatise on the clerg y’s responsibilities to the people they serve, especially their spiritual 
formation.
66. De coniuratione Catilinae X.1. “When our country had grown great through toil” 
(S a l lu s t , 17).
67. In this letter, King Theodoric, who was king of the Ostrogoths from 475 to 526 and 
the Visigoths from 511 to 526, speaks to his nephew Theodahad about the latter’s avarice: “If 
all are bound to seek justice and to avoid ignoble gains, most especially are they thus bound 
who pride themselves on their close relationship to us” (Cassiodorus, Letters, 272).
68. “Steadfast loyalty guards the king, and he upholds his throne by justice.” King Sol-
omon (c. 1010–c. 931 b.c.), who succeeded his father David as king of Israel, is believed to 
be the author of three Old Testament books: Book of Proverbs (A vast majority of the eight 
hundred proverbs are attributed to King Solomon), Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs.
69. “A man must be defended by the affection and good will of his fellow-citizens, not 
by arms” (Cicero, Philippics, 112). A philippic is a speech in which the orator condemns a 
politician. Demosthenes (384–322 b.c.) delivered the first philippics against Phillip II of 
Macedon. In the original text, Lópe
z, perhaps influenced by his discussion of the king’s 
scepter, writes sceptrum instead of saeptum,

44 BooK I
equality and practicing mercy and truth equally to all. As Solomon says 
in Proverbs, chapter 16: “Non decet principem labium mendax.”70 It is 
necessary to treat all the same way he would want the princes to treat him 
if he were a subject. As Ioannes Solobriensis Anglus [ Johannes Saresber-
iensis, or John of Salisbury] says in Policraticus, book 5: “Traianus opti-
mus Imperator arguentibus eum amicis quod in omnes et vltra quam Im-
peratorem deceat communis esset, respondit se talem velle Imperatorem 
esse privatis, quales imperatores sibi esse privato optasser.”71 In chapter 32 
of the Ecclesiasticus: “Rectorem te posuerunt? Noli extolli, esto in illis, 
quasi unus ex ipsis.”72
The king, like the other pieces, is able to move freely on the first move 
as long as there is not any threat to him. I call the threat check because 
the king can only move from square to square when in check. If the king 
moves freely when not in check, the first time it can leap three squares 
whenever it finds a clear path. Furthermore, it can do so over another 
piece or a pawn from his side or the other, as long as the objective is not 
to take anything from the opponent, because the king is not permitted 
to capture when it leaps.73 Though it cannot capture when it leaps, all of 
the rest of the pieces can for several reasons, which can be provided here; 
70. The phrase that López quotes here is a variation of Proverbs 17:7. “Non decent stul-
tum verba conposita nec principem labium mentiens.” (Fine words ill fit a fool; how much 
more lying lips, a noble.)
71. The original version by John of Salisbury reads as follows: “Legitur imperator Traja-
nus arguentibus eum quod nimis esset comis, tale dédisse responsum; Talem velle se impera-
torem esse privatis, quales imperatores sibi esse privatus optasset” (Wallerand, Les œuvres de 
Siger de Courtrai, 34); “Trajan, the best among the gentile emperors, responded eminently 
to the argument of his friends that he was too intimate with everyone and went beyond 
what was decent for emperors. For he wished to be an emperor to private persons of such a 
kind as he had wanted the emperors to be when he was a private person” ( John of Salisbury, 
Policratus, trans. Nederman, 50). John of Salisbury (1115–1180) was a philosopher and the 
author of Policraticus (1159), a book about moral and political philosophy, and of Metalogi-
con (1159), a defense of the trivium, the three stages of learning that correspond to cognitive 
development and consist of grammar, dialectic, and rhetoric.
72. ”If you are chosen to preside at a dinner, do not be puffed up, but with the guests be 
one of them.”
73. According to Alfonso X the Learned, the king moved only one square at a time. 
Lucena notes, however, the same movements for the king as Ruy L
ópe
z does here. Murray 
concludes: “If we compare the rules of the Spanish chess of 1490–1500 as given by Lucena 
with those of 1283 as given in Alf., we see that the game must have undergone a continuous 
process of development of move during the mediaeval period” (History of Chess, 526).

 BooK I                                                    45
the best reason is that there is no other move that pleased the inventor 
of the game. Although he found some reason for this rule, it is, I believe, 
hidden. As Cassiodorus says in chapter 9 of De anima: “Melius est enim 
in tam occultis causis confiteri ignorantiam quam periculosam assumere 
fortassis audaciam.”74 As the The Digest of Justinian states: “Non omni-
um, quae a maioribus constituta sunt, ratio reddi potest.”75 “Multa iure 
civili contra rationem disputandi pro utilitate communi recepta esse.”76  
The king has the freedom to move three spaces the first time, however 
he chooses. It may move to either of its sides in its rank or forward like a 
pawn, knight, rook, bishop, or queen. The king may move like a knight 
through either of the other two ranks after his own, or it can move diago-
nally like the queen, above a piece or a pawn, either his or his opponent’s, 
or however he wishes. All this freedom, which is not granted to any other 
piece, comes from being the king.
It should be known that in some parts of Italy, the king can leap his 
entire rank the first time, from his square to the last one before the rook, 
placing the rook next to him in one movement.77 In other parts of Ita-
ly, the king can leap no more than three squares, from his square to the 
knight’s square; and with respect to the queen, it may leap from his square 
to the queen’s square. This maneuver takes place between the king and 
either of the rooks in one leap. Elsewhere in Italy, in addition to these 
moves, the king can move any of the pawns in the second rank and oc-
cupy the square where the pawn was. All of these uses are not good, nor 
do they conform to reason, because if it makes sense for the king to leap 
three squares, as we will discuss, it would not with these other abuses. This 
chapter is organized, therefore, according to ways in which not to play.
74. “In such mysterious matters it is better to confess ignorance than to assume a bold-
ness” (Cassiodorus: Institutions, trans. Halporn and Vessey, 261). De anima (540 a.d.; On 
the Soul) is a treatise on the nature of the soul and life after death.
75. “It is not possible for all men to determine the reason for all that their ancestors 
established” ( Justinian, Digest, trans. Watson, 13; book 1, title 3, section 20).
76. “Indeed, it can be proved with reference to innumerable cases that the civil law has 
accepted things for the general good that do not accord with pure logic” ( Justinian, Civil 
Law, trans. Scott, 103; book 9, title 2, section 51).
77. This move is called castling. During the fifty years between the publication of Da-
miano’s and Lopez’s treatises, chess evolved differently in different countries, especially 
Spain, Italy, and France, which meant that players had to learn several different sets of rules.

46 BooK I
It would be advantageous to know, nevertheless, that the first time the 
king moves, when it is not in check and on its square the first time, it can 
use all of the other pieces to make nine leaps. The king can make one leap 
to his knight’s square [g1] and the other leap to the queen’s bishop’s square 
[c1], both in his rank. In the second rank, he has another two leaps: one to 
the king’s knight’s pawn’s square, which is called the knight’s second [g2], 
and the other leap to the queen’s bishop’s square, which is called the bish-
op’s second [c2]. In the third rank, there may be five leaps: one to the king’s 
knight’s third square [g3]; another to the king’s bishop’s third square [f3]; 
another to his own third square [e3]; another to his queen’s third square 
[d3]; and another to the queen’s bishop’s third square [c3]. It is understood 
that these squares are empty; they are not occupied by another piece or 
a pawn. It is also understood that these moves transpire when the king 
leaps, but when it cannot, it can attack only five places from his square: to 
his queen’s square, to his bishop’s square, to his queen’s second square, to 
his own second square, and to his bishop’s second square.
When the king finds himself in the middle of the board, as if he 
were to find himself in his own fourth square [e4], he can attack his own 
third square [e3], the opposing king’s fourth square [e5], his own bish-
op’s third square [f3], his own bishop’s fourth square [f4], the opposing 
bishop’s fourth square [f5], his own queen’s third square [d3], his own 
queen’s fourth square [d4] and the opposing queen’s fourth square [d5]. 
In this way, the king goes from square to square wherever he finds him-
self: straight, across, or diagonally.
This information is sufficient about the king’s travel and movement, 
noting only one thing, and that is to know that the first move consists 
of three leaps and no more. The king leaps only three squares, and no 
more, to show that the moves that the other pieces make are inherent in 
the king. It is also noteworthy that the king possesses perfection more 
so than the other pieces, id est, the other pieces’ perfect traits are one in 
him. As Aristotle says in book 1, chapter 8 of the Politicorum: “Principem 
quidem perfectam habere oportet moralem virtutem.”78 I use the ternary 
78. “Hence the ruler ought to have moral virtue in perfection” (Poetics 51; 1260a). Po-
liticorum (350 b.c.; Politics) is Aristotle’s treatise on political theory. This quotation appears 
in chapter 13 of book 1.

 BooK I                                                    47
number because all others are religious and sacred, as it is demonstrated 
in all of antiquity that it consists of one, two, and three, which together 
make a senary, which is the first perfect number.79 It denotes here a name 
of six people who compose a perfect kingdom: king, queen, knights, vic-
ars, bishops and people. And that is enough for this chapter.
chapt
er 11
In which the shape, position, and movement  
of the queen are explained
The shape of the queen, which we call Lady because of how it was first 
known, represents a pleasant woman who is seated on a royal chair with 
a crown on her head, her dress embroidered with brocade, and a coat of 
shiny stones. The crown and the royal chair signify that she is equal to the 
king in dignity and in the reverence with which she should be honored; 
the man’s glory, honor, and crown denote a good woman who is obedient 
to reason. St. Paul in the first Epistola 1 ad Corinthios, chapter 11: “Mulier 
gloria viri est.”80 In Ecclesiasticus, chapter 25: “Beatus qui habitat cum mu-
liere sensata .”81 In chapter 26: “Mulieris bonae beatus vir: numerus enim 
annorum illiorum duplex. Gratia super gratiam mulier sancta et pudora-
ta .”82 And in Proverbs, chapter 12: “Mulier diligens corona est viro suo.”83 
In chapter 14: “Sapiens mulier aedificavit domum suam; insipiens instruc-
tam quoque destruet manibus.”84 Plato in Meno circa principi: “Decet mu-
lierem domum bene dispensare, salva facientem que intrinsecus et obse-
quentem esse viro.”85 The crown and the chair represent the dignity that 
79. Six is a perfect number because it is equal to the sum of its factors (1 + 2 + 3 = 6).
80. “Woman is the glory of man.” 1 Corinthians 11:7.
81. “Happy the man who lives with a sensible woman.” Ecclesiasticus 25:8.
82. “Happy the husband of a good wife; the number of his days will be doubled. . . . A 
mo
dest wife is a supreme blessing.” Ecclesiasticus 26:1 and 26:14, respectively.
83. “A woman of worth is the crown of her husband.” Proverbs 12:4.
84. “Wisdom builds her house, but Folly tears hers down with her own hands.” Prov-
erbs 14:1.
85. Meno tells Socrates that a woman’s virtue consists of “ordering the house well, look-
ing after the property indoors, and obeying her husband” (Plato, trans. Lamb, 80). Plato 
(4 27–347 b.c.) was a Greek philosopher who is the founder of the Academy in Athens, 
which is considered to be first institution of higher learning. Meno (380 b.c.) is a Socratic 
dialogue between Socrates and the fictional character Meno; it centers on human virtue.

48 BooK I
the queen holds over other women. The gold dress and the coat of shiny 
stones represent her corporal and spiritual beauty, and the other good and 
radiant virtues with which she has been endowed, so that the king, and 
her husband, abstains from other illicit embraces, because this faithfulness 
is her principal honor. Aristotle in Oeconomicorum: “Maximus autem est 
honor honestae mulieri, si respicit virum suum castum esse in eam et de 
nulla alia muliere curare, sed praeter omnes alias propriam et amicam et 
fidelem putet eam .
 . . si cognoverit fideliter atque iuste ad se virum ama-
bilem esse, et ipsa circa virum iuste fidelis erit . . . ni
hil ergo est propius nec 
maius uxori pretiosa communicatone et fideli ad virum.”86
The queen whose color is white is on the white square and to the king’s 
left. Since the white square denotes chastity and honesty, her presence 
there means that the other virtues she must possess are evident. As the Lex 
Authentica, article Quomodo episcopi, presbyteri et diaconi says: “Pudicitia 
quam maxime mulieres ornat.”87 It is significant for two reasons that the 
queen is on the king’s left. First is the marital embraces according to the 
Cantares: “Leva ejus sub capite meo et dextera illius amplexabitur me.”88 
The other, which has as its advocate the king, because what is to the right 
is our protector and our refuge. According to what Antonio de Nebrija 
(1441–1522) declares very well in his third Quinquagena about the Psalm: 
“Dixit dominus domino meo, sede a dextris meis.”89
86. “Now a virtuous wife is best honored when she sees that her husband is faithful to 
her, and has no preference for another woman; but before all others loves and trusts her and 
holds her as his own.
 . . . I
f she perceives that her husband’s affection for her is faithful and 
righteous, she too will be faithful and righteous towards him.
 . . . Now to a wife nothing is of 
more value, nothing more rightfully her own, than honored and faithful partnership with 
her husband” (Economics, trans. Armstrong; book 3, section 2).
87. “Modesty, which is the greatest ornament of the sex” (Kant 37; the article in which 
this quotation appears in the Lex Authentica addresses the comportment of deaconesses). 
The Lex Authentica (Authentic Law) comprises Justinian’s Codex Justinianus (Code of Law; 
529 a.d.), Corpus Juris Civilis (Body of Civil Law), Digesta (The Digest of Justinian; 533 a.d.), 
Institutiones (Institutes; 533 a.d.), and Novellae Constitutiones (New Constitutions;  534  
a.d.). Justinian appointed teams of lawyers to revise all of the laws in the Body of Civil Law 
and to publish the ones they deemed to be authentic in the Lex Authentica.
88. “His left hand is under my head, and his right arm embraces me.” Song of Solomon 
8:3. The Song of Solomon is one of the last five scrolls that make up the Writings, which is 
the last section of the Old Testament. The other scrolls are Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, 
and Esther.
89. “The Lord says to my lord: Sit at my right hand.” The Quinquagena (1507) is a series 

 BooK I                                                   49
The queen whose color is black is on a black square and to the right 
of the king so that the squares correspond to their position according to 
the organization of the board. Later in the chapter, we will talk about the 
reason why the players have the white squares to their right. The queen 
positions herself next to her husband, and in the middle, as equal holder 
of the common goods that belong to both, for it could not be less, so that 
the man possesses the property that belongs to him, and that of the wom-
an belongs to the woman.
The rest does not lack meaning, because being in the black square and 
together with her husband means that the woman dazzles with her hus-
band’s rays, as the Lex Authentica titled De consulibus relates: “Alia vero 
non decorabitur.
 . . . Ux
ores coruscant radiis maritorum.”90 Her presence 
on the right side means that she is more honored than any other person 
in the kingdom. We place the person we want to honor to the right, in 
accordance with the Psalm: “Astitit regina a dextris tuis in vestito deau-
rato circumdata varietate.”91 The two queens are placed and established 
in the middle of all of the other people. This practice reflected the custom 
of the Persians, who believed the middle location of seats and assemblies 
was the most highly regarded, according to the testimony of Xenophon 
in the life of Cyrus, king of the Persians. The same was true for the Nu-
midians, according to the testimony of Sallust. It is what Virgil explained 
at the end of the first book of the Aeneid, where he discusses the most 
glorious place occupied by the queen and says: “Mediamque locavit.”92
After the shape and the positioning of the queen, what remains is an 
explanation of her movement, and it is such that the queen, or lady, may 
move straight and transversely all over the board like a rook, as long as 
there is a clear path, capturing all that is in its way or it wishes. It also 
moves diagonally, capturing like a bishop and a pawn, and finally, it has 
the same ability to move and to capture as all of the pieces and pawns, 
of short essays in which Antonio de Nebrija challenges the legitimacy of fifty words in Holy 
Scripture.
90. “Hence no other [woman than the wife] will be honored.
 . . . [s
he] shall be distin-
guished in this honor” ( Justinian, The Civil Law, 17 ); De consulibus (On consuls), Title 5.
91. “The Queen stands at your right hand, arrayed in gold.” Psalm 45:10.
92. “Placed herself in the middle.” Middle is another way of saying the place of honor.

50 BooK I
except the knight. The reason the queen cannot move like the knight is 
to differentiate it from the king, who can move anywhere, as we said.93 It 
is acknowledged that the queen is an imitation of the Amazons, whose 
queen went to Troy, where Palamedes might have invented the game, 
and fought bravely against the Greeks, according to what Virgil says in 
book 1: “Penthesilea furens, mediisque in milibus ardet . . . bellatrix, aude-
tque viris concurrere virgo.”94
If we concede that Xerxes was the inventor of chess, we will discuss 
the placement of the queen in this game, noting the ancient custom of 
the kings of Persia, whose king, when he went to war, took with him his 
wife and concubines—as one can read about Darius, king of those parts, 
and many others.95 The women obeyed to please the king and to demon-
strate their love for him. Since the kingdom cared greatly for the king’s 
successor, they wanted the king to have the queen with him not only in 
the city, but also when he traveled.
When the game was first invented, therefore, the queen did not move 
except from square to square.96 In times of war, the queen was the weak-
est piece. It is said today that the queen’s role is to be on the lookout for 
Moors, with the understanding that it is not respectable for an honorable 
woman to be traveling frequently, and even less so to remote places where 
she can lose her honor easily, which is what happened to Dinah, Jacob’s 
daughter, and many other women.97   In order not to continue this topic, 
I will leave it there.
When the players saw the queen on the battlefield, as I said, they 
wanted her to be the main piece on the board after the king. It would 
be necessary to pay attention to her, therefore, so as not to lose her, be-
93. López alludes here to the king’s ability to leap.
94. Aeneid, book 1, vv. 695 and 697. “She [Penthesilea] flashes through her thousands . . . 
soldier-virgin and queen, daring to war with men” (Virgil, Aeneid, trans. Mandelbaum, 18).
95. Darius I (550–486 b.c.) ruled Persia from 522–486 b.c.
96. Lópe
z seems to imply that the queen moved only from square to square as a symbol 
of her loyalty to the king.
97. Even though the nearly eight-hundred year war between the Christians and the 
Moors for control of the Iberian Peninsula ended in 1492, there were many tropes that hear-
kened back to this period in Spain’s history. Lópe
z incorporates one of them here to describe 
the queen’s feebleness.

 BooK I                                                    51
cause the game is rarely won if she is captured, and often the queen is able 
to restore a lost game—many pieces cannot do so. They placed as many 
pieces and pawns on the queen’s side as on the king’s side; furthermore, 
they wanted the pieces and pawns on the queen’s side to be known as her 
pieces to distinguish them from the king’s pieces. It is beneficial to know 
that the queen has, on her side, as many people as the king has on his, but 
her pieces are closer to the opposing king’s attack than are her own king’s 
pieces, and, therefore, it makes it easier to defeat the enemies of the king’s 
people. Now, we close this chapter about the queen.
chapter 12
In which the shape, position, and movement  
of the bishops are explained
According to what Jacobus de Cessolis writes, the shape of the bishops 
resembled advisory judges, seated at a desk and with a book opened be-
fore their eyes. Since some cases are criminal and others are disputes over 
temporal property, it was fitting that there were two judges in the king-
dom. One bishop in a black square, which represents the judge of crim-
inal cases; another bishop in a white square, which represents the judge 
for property disputes. The function of these judges is to advise the king, 
and to establish and to codify the laws that are necessary, by order of the 
king, to govern the kingdom. As Solomon says in Proverbs, chapter 2: 
“Ubi non est gubernator, populus corruet salus autem ubi multa consil-
ia .”98  In Ecclesiasticus, chapter 37: “Ante omnem actum consilium stabile 
praecedat te.”99 In chapter 32: “Sine consilio nihil facias, et post factum 
non poenitebis.”100 In Tobias, chapter 4: “Consilium a sapiente semper 
perquirere.”101
It is a requirement to choose for these duties wise and God-fearing 
98. “For lack guidance a people falls; security lies in many counselors.” Proverbs 11:14.
99. “Before all acts allow steady counsel to precede you.” Ecclesiasticus 37:20.
100. “Do nothing without deliberation; then once you have acted, have no regrets” (Ec-
clesiasticus 32:24).
101. “Seek counsel from every wise person” (Tobit 4:19). The Book of Tobit, also known 
as the Book of Tobias, is one of Roman Catholicism’s deuterocanonical books.

52 BooK I
people so that they are devoid of favoritism and emotion in order that 
they treat everyone equally. As Sallust says: “Omnes homines qui de rebus 
dubiis consultant, ab odio, amicitia, ira atque misericordia vacuos esse de-
cet. Haud facile animus verum providet, ubi illa officiunt.”102 As Tullius 
says in book 1, chapter 19 of De Officiis: “Qui autem parti civium con-
sulunt, partem negligunt, rem perniciosissam in civitatem inducunt, se-
ditionem atque discordiam.”103 Cassiodorus, for this reason, says in book 
1, chapter 22 of his epistles: “Decet regalis apicis curiam generalitatis 
custodire concordiam.”104 As The Digest of Justinian, title Postliminium 
reversis, says: “Si quis ingenua per civiles dissentiones semper respublica 
laeditur.”105 It is appropriate that people, therefore, are delegated for this 
function, as Isidore says: “Sine fuco exhibeat bonitatem.”106 In order to 
abbreviate, I will not expound on many other things.
One bishop places itself next to the king and another next to the queen 
to show that it is always appropriate for princes to have good advisors, so 
that the princes do not do anything that is not correct or inappropriate. 
Ecclesiasticus: “Sine consilio nihil facias, et post factum non poenitebis.”107 
In Proverbs, chapter 13: “Qui autem agunt cuncta consilio reguntur sapien-
ta .”108 As Tullius says in book 1 of De inventione, chapter 25: “Consilium 
est aliquid faciendi vel non faciendi, vere excogitara ratio.”109
Since counsel is very necessary in a war, and this game represents a 
war and not a kingdom, as we said earlier, we will dedicate a chapter to 
102. De coniuratione Catilinae 51. “It becomes all men who deliberate on dubious mat-
ters, to be influenced neither by hatred, affection, anger, nor pity. The mind, when such feel-
ings obstruct its view, cannot see what is right” (Battles, Calvin’s Commentary on Seneca’s 
De Clementia, 367).
103. De Officiis 1.25. “Those who care for the interests of a part of the citizens and ne-
glect the other part, bring into the city the most pernicious element: sedition and discord” 
(Mulgan, Good and Bad Power, 60).
104. Epistles, 1.23. “The concord and harmony of subjects redound to the praise of their 
prince” (Cassiodorus, Letters, 157).
105. “The State is always harmed by political disagreements” (translation mine).
106. Book 2, chapter 55. “Let him show goodness without pretense” (translation mine).
107. “Do not do anything without counsel, and later there will be no regrets.” Ecclesi-
asticus 32:24.
108. “They who do all things with counsel are guided by wisdom.” Proverbs 13:10.
109. “By counsel, we mean a carefully considered resolution to do or not to do some-
thing.” De inventione 1.25. De inventione (On Invention) is a handbook for orators that Ci-
cero wrote as a young man.

 BooK I                                                    53
the function and meaning of every piece. It will be different from what 
we have said until now, which is consistent with Jacobus de Cessolis’s 
teaching. Since we expand his ideas and corroborate with proof what 
he does not offer, perhaps by chance I will please some people with the 
meanings he assigns to the pieces and pawns.
With respect to the movement of these bishops, it is diagonally, and 
each bishop stays away from the other’s squares: the bishops on white 
squares, advance on white squares, and the bishops on black squares, ad-
vance on black squares. The reason for this movement is, according to 
Jacobus de Cessolis, so that each judge understands the charge assigned 
to him and does not sow discord by involving himself in another judge’s 
duty. With respect to what Jacobus de Cessolis says here, however, we will 
illustrate his errors in the chapter in which we discuss what each piece on 
this board represents, id est, posed on a battlefield, waiting for his enemy.
These bishops, whenever they have an unobstructed path, can move 
diagonally across all of the squares they can reach, capturing or not cap-
turing another piece or a pawn. In order for the bishop to know well how 
to attack, it considers its square. If it is the king’s bishop that is white, 
it can attack in two directions and through two files. In addition, it is 
beneficial to know that it can move to the second square in its knight’s 
file [g2] and to the third square in its rook’s file [h3]. If the bishop were to 
move to its left, it may do so a maximum of six squares, counting from its 
square, and six ranks; it is beneficial to know its own rank [f1], the king’s 
second rank [e2], the queen’s third rank [d3], and the fourth rank of the 
queen’s bishop [c4]. All of these moves can take place from its side to the 
end of the board.
On the other side of the board, it can move to the fourth square of 
the opposing queen’s knight [b5] and to the third square of the opposing 
queen’s rook [a6]. If it were to find itself in the middle of the board, such 
as the king’s fourth rank [e4], it can attack in four directions: two toward 
the enemy’s side and two toward its own camp. When the bishop moves in 
the direction of its opponent, it attacks to the right on the bishop’s fourth 
square [f5], the knight’s third square [g6], and the opposing rook’s sec-
ond square [h7]. To the left, it attacks the queen’s fourth square [d5], the 

54 BooK I
bishop’s third square [c6], the knight’s second square [b7], and the queen’s 
rook’s square [a8]. When it returns to its own camp, it attacks to the left: its 
queen’s third square [d3], its bishop’s second square [c2], and the square of 
its queen’s knight [b1]. To the right, it attacks via its own third square [f3], 
the knight’s second square [g2], and the rook’s square [h1]. These move-
ments apply to all of the bishops, since in the past, according to what is 
said, they moved only three squares and jumped over a piece or a pawn if it 
wanted to do so—but only diagonally.110 This information is about the old 
game that was played formerly in Spain, as the saying goes, “Don’t consid-
er the bishop vile, because it can capture on the third square.” The Moors 
played this way, and since their game was despicable and not adapted to its 
original meaning, as we will discuss, the good players abandoned it.
Some  people  ask,  which  piece  is  the  best  one,  the  bishop  or  the  
knight. It is important to know that, in general, both are considered 
equal, but according to the disposition of the game, sometimes the bishop 
is better, and other times, the knight is better. There are many people who 
play better with the bishop, and there are others who play better with the 
knight. Generally, however, the best players play better with the bishop. 
In my opinion, it is the best piece for several reasons. The first reason: if 
one has two bishops or a bishop and a knight, it is possible to place the 
opponent in check, which two knights cannot do. The second reason: the 
bishop attacks the enemy from afar. The third reason: the bishop protects 
its own king better from any check. In addition, as it protects the king, it 
can attack the piece that places the king in check, and the knight cannot 
because it is not as powerful when it protects the king, and, therefore, it 
cannot attack the enemy as effectively. The fourth reason: the bishop can 
conceal any of the opponent’s pieces or pawns, which the knight cannot 
do. The fifth reason: the bishop protects its pawns, and it is easier to pro-
tect the bishop from pawns. The sixth reason: the bishop can attack with 
more efficacy and authority. The seventh reason: the bishop can advance 
its pawns to attack the enemy and to make them queens with much more 
110. In the Middle Ages, the bishop, known then as the alfil, was able to jump over 
intermediary pieces. The bishop’s current iteration dates to the beginning of the sixteenth 
centur y.

 BooK I                                                    55
success than the knight.111 The eighth reason: the bishop and a rook can 
win the battle against another rook, which the knight cannot do. The 
ninth reason: the opposing king cannot pursue the bishop by himself nor 
prohibit it from fleeing, as though on a horse. For example, if the bishop 
were placed on any of the rooks’ four squares [a1, h1, a8, or h8], and the 
king were to position himself on any of the third squares of the rooks’ 
bishops [c3, f3, c6, or f6] in whose square the knight was positioned, the 
king would not be able to escape the bishop. The tenth reason: the king 
can move effectively against a pawn that becomes a knight, but not a bish-
op, from the ranks of the queen’s rook. The eleventh reason: a bishop with 
a pawn can close a rook’s path. For example, if the bishop finds itself in 
the opposing knight’s second square [g7], and the rook’s pawn, which 
protects the bishop, has advanced to the opposing rook’s third square 
[h6], and the opposing rook finds itself in its second square [h7], the path 
is closed and the rook cannot move, unless it captures the bishop, which 
the knight cannot do. The bishop has other advantages that are known 
to the good players. The knight also has some advantages that the bishop 
does not have, about which we will speak in the next chapter.
chapter 13
In which the shape, position, and movement  
of the knights are explained
What we call in this game knight consisted of a knight in a habit on a 
horse and completely armed, denoting the duty he had as a knight: to be 
a guardian of his village and his kingdom at all times, especially in time 
of war, so that nothing harmful occurred to the homeland or the king-
dom. There were two knights, one for the king and one for the queen, 
to show that it is appropriate for the knights to be not only in the king’s 
111. This move is known as pawn promotion. When the pawn reaches the opponent’s 
eighth rank, the player can choose to “promote” it to a knight, a bishop, a rook, or a queen 
by exchanging the pawn for one of these captured pieces. Underpromotion occurs when the 
player decides to promote the pawn not to a queen, but, instead, to a knight, a bishop, or a 
rook, for strategic reasons.

56 BooK I
service, but also in the queen’s service. Since the queen was a part of the 
marriage, she deserved the same treatment as the king. In this way, the 
knights are on the right and on the left, clinging to the king and to the 
queen like a crown. After the knights are the bishops, who, as we said, are 
the kingdom’s judges and legislators, which means they must be vigilant 
and, therefore, work mightily to ensure that fair laws are protected with 
diligence. It is not enough for the king to be decorated with weapons, 
but he should also be adorned with laws, as Aristotle says in chapter 6 
of book 1 of the Ars rhetorica: “In legibus salus civitatis posita est.”112 It 
means that the well-being of a city is in its laws.
The movement of this knight is three squares on three ranks, not 
straight or diagonally, but from white to black and black to white, count-
ing three from its location. The reason it can move only three squares is 
because it is more beneficial to the knight than any other piece to imi-
tate the king as much as possible. In addition, the first time, the king can 
move only three squares. Consequently, the knight does not move more 
squares than the king; it endeavors to partake in his lord and prince’s per-
fection, which is denoted by the number three.
As we mentioned in the chapter about the king, the knight can leave 
his square [g1] and enter the battle by one of three ways: his king’s second 
square [e2], the bishop’s third square [f3], or his rook’s third square [h3]. 
The knight may not move to these squares, however, if one of its pawns 
or pieces already occupies them. It can also move to the second square of 
the knight’s queen [d2], the bishop’s third square [c3], or his rook’s third 
square [a3]. If these squares are occupied by the opponent’s pieces, the 
knight can still advance by capturing them. In this way, the knight can 
travel the entire board, as if on the battlefield, helping his own soldiers 
and attacking the enemy.
It should be noted that this piece’s moves are difficult to remember 
for those players who want to play by memory. In addition to what we 
have said (that the knight can attack three ways and along three ranks 
[f3]) if it finds itself on any of the rook’s squares [e.g., h1], it can attack 
112. Ars Rhetorica (The Art of Rhetoric) is a fourth-century treatise on persuasion.

 BooK I                                                   57
only in two ranks and in two squares, namely in its own rank, the third 
square [g3], and the bishop’s rank, in the second square [f2], where it 
can do the less harm. In other places, it can do harm in four squares and 
two ranks, as well as four files. Other times, four squares on four ranks; 
and on other ranks, six squares and eight squares. It vanquishes as many 
squares as it can, but where it is most successful is on eight squares and 
four ranks; where it has the least control, however, is on two squares and 
two ranks. We will note that it never vanquishes or does harm in ranks or 
on squares that are not an even number, unless it is the number three. The 
reason is that the knight’s movements were formulated with that number. 
Furthermore, since it will be known to all players who want to know well 
all of the knight’s jumps, I will not dwell on it any more.
We will note that the knight has some distinctive features that other 
pieces do not have. One, its check cannot be covered, because its move-
ment is different from that of the other pieces.113 The king, therefore, 
should move himself to escape the knight’s check if, by chance, he cannot 
capture the knight with any other piece or a pawn. The second feature is 
that, since the game is cluttered with other pieces, the knight is the most 
apt piece to enter and exit from among its enemies, because of its jumps. 
The third is that a rook cannot win the game against a knight when there 
remains no other piece or pawns [except the king]; and against a bishop, 
the knight wins often but with much effort—except according to Italian 
rules, according to which the knight cannot win against a bishop, as we 
will discuss in the section on the game’s general rules. The fourth feature 
is if there is an equal number of pawns at the end, and there is only a 
knight on one side and a bishop on the other side, the player with the ad-
vantage is the one with the knight whose pawns are on squares where the 
bishop cannot do harm. In these types of matches, the knight is generally 
another piece that is capable of more harm than a bishop. The knight also 
has other advantages that any player would know how to use in his favor, 
but, in general, I consider the bishop more effective than I have said, ex-
cept in the case I cited.
113. A piece “covers” when the player moves it into a position where it can protect an-
other piece from capture.

58 BooK I
chapter 14
In which the shape, position, and movement  
of the rooks are explained
The rooks are the last pieces on the edges, one on the side of the king and 
one on the side of the queen, or lady, according to Jacobus de Cessolis, 
whose doctrine we have addressed until now and will continue to address 
until all of the pieces have been discussed. We will dedicate a chapter to 
explaining what they mean and represent in this army. Returning to the 
matter at hand, according to what the aforementioned Jacobus wrote, the 
earliest rooks, Xerxes’s invention, were in the shape of knights seated on 
their horses without weapons, but with clothing, or a scarlet cape made 
out of the fur of martens, a lance held upright, and a helmet in the shape 
of a bonnet on his head. The rooks represented the king’s vicars, because, 
as Cassiodorus says in book 10, chapter 6 of his epistles: “Necessarium 
probatur esse rei publicae personas dignitatibus aptas eligere.”114 Since 
the king could not be in all places at once, the rooks could govern and 
rule by authority of the king.
Placing aside much of what I could offer, for the sake of brevity, I will 
move on to the rook’s location on the board, which is farthest from the 
king. It suits the curates and legates well to be in these locations, where 
the king cannot be, and to carry the same royal power. It is important for 
the king’s subjects to obey the curates and legates, because if they do not, 
it is the same as not obeying the king. The evangelist St. Luke, chapter 
10: “Qui autem me spernit, spernit eum qui me misit.”115 In the Gospel 
of John, chapter 13: “Qui accipit, si quem misero, me accipit, qui autem 
me accipit, accipit eum, qui me misit.”116 It is advantageous to the king 
to choose curates who are loyal and wise, so that they can govern loyally 
114. In this letter, King Theodahad, who was king of the Ostrogoths from 534 to 536, 
addresses Patricius, whom the king names quaestor: “In conferring upon you the office of 
Quaestor we look first to character, and we find in you that love of justice which is all im-
portant in a representative of the Prince” (Cassiodorus, Letters, 4 22).
115. “And whoever rejects me rejects the one who sent me.” Luke 10:16.
116. “Whoever receives the one I send receives me, and whoever receives me receives the 
one who sent me.” John 13:20.

 BooK I                                                    59
and wisely. Solomon in Proverbs, chapter 13: “Legatus fidelis sanitas.”117 
Quintilian in Declamatione 10: “Legatus a praecepto non recedat.”118 
Cassiodorus in book 2 of his epistles, epistle 6: “Omnis legatio virum sa-
pientem requirat.”119
The rook’s movement is straight ahead, either one square or many, 
provided that the squares are not occupied by any of its own pieces. If any 
of its opponent’s pieces are in its path, the rook will capture them. It can 
move throughout the file from its square, in front of it or across. Since 
it can advance via two directions, straight or across, its movement will 
always be straight, without moving diagonally. After the queen, it is the 
most important piece, because of its movements; in addition, the rook 
and the king are the only pieces that can produce checkmate, which no 
other piece can do by itself, except the queen. The rooks are the last pieces 
to leave the king’s rank, meaning that they are, according to Jacobus, the 
curates or the legates. Their authority is not virtuous until they exercise 
it. Consequently, it is reasonable that they are residents of the royal palace 
when they do not practice their legation. If a path is opened to the rooks 
through the nobility, which is the pieces, or the commoners, which are 
the pawns, the rooks can exercise the authority they have well. This in-
formation is sufficient with respect to the pieces. Now, let’s address the 
pawns.
chapt
er 15
In which the shape, position, and movement  
of the pawns are explained
All of the pawns on this board, id est, kingdom, according to Jacobus de 
Cessolis, represent the commoners and the artifices without which the 
kingdom could not be constituted. As Aristotle says in book 2, chapter 
5 of the Politica: “Omnis civitas indigent artificibus.”120 As commoners, 
117. “A trustworthy envoy is a healing remedy.” Proverbs 13:17.
118. “The ambassador does not depart from the precept” (translation mine).
119. “Every embassy requires a prudent man” (Cassiodorus, Letters,   174) .
120. “All cities need craftsmen.”

60 BooK I
all of them have the same movement, although some are more powerful 
and better for certain things than others, as we will discuss later. So, as I 
was saying, one of the movements of the pawns is straight ahead one or 
two squares from the square where it begins the game. After the pawns 
move one time, however, they can move only from square to square, un-
til they arrive at their opponent’s last one. Once there, they obtain the 
power and identity of the queens, id est, as it were, they deserve to be 
Major Generals in the army. Until a pawn becomes a queen, however, it 
cannot move backward, but rather only forward in its own file. When a 
pawn captures another pawn or a piece, it enters a different file. When 
pawns capture another pawn or a piece, they leave their own files and en-
ter others, because they capture diagonally, one square from where they 
find themselves. Sometimes, the pawns place the king in check this way, 
and most times in checkmate. The pawn, with another piece, can place 
the king in check, because there is not a square between the king and the 
pawn in which a pawn or another piece can be placed. The pawn possess-
es the ability to injure or to kill not only other pawns, but also all of the 
main pieces, including the king. As the author of the book titled Facetus 
de moribus et vita says: “Quemque decet patriam defendere tempore bel-
li.”121 Each one can defend itself justly, in accordance with The Digest of 
Justinian, book 1.3: “Hoc evenit, ut quod quisque ob tutelam corporis sui 
fecerit, iure fecisse existimetur.”122 Et titu ad.1.Acqui, book 9: “Adversus 
periculum naturalis ratio permittit se defendere.”123 Et titu De bonis eo-
rum qui ante sententiam, book 48.21: “Ignoscendum censuerunt ei, qui 
sanguinem suum qualiter redemptum voluit.”124 Et titu ad leg Cor de sic: 
“Si quis percussorem .
 . . de
fensor propriae salutis in nullo pecasse vide-
121. “Anyone can defend the country in time of war.”
122. “This result is that whatever a person does for his bodily safety, he can be held to 
have done rightly.” The title of the section where this sentence appears is De iustitia et iure 
(Concerning justice and law). The Digest of Justinian 1.1.3.
123. “Natural reason allows for the defense of oneself against danger.” The Digest of Jus-
tinian 9.2.4.
124. The entire title is De bonis eorum, qui ante sententiam vel mortem sibi consciverunt 
vel accusatorem corruperunt (Concerning the property of those who have either killed them-
selves or corrupted their accusers before judgment has been rendered). “They who desire to 
save the life of a blood relative regardless of the ransom should be forgiven.” The Digest of 
Justinian 48.21.1.

 BooK I                                                    61
tur.”125 Et titu ad legem Aquiliam.l.faciam.penul. “Vim enim vi defendere 
omnes leges omniaque iura permittunt.”126
The pawns attack in the following ways: The rook’s pawn [h2] at-
tacks the knight’s third square [g3]; the knight’s pawn [g2] attacks the 
same  rook’s  third  square  [h3]  and  the  bishop’s  third  square  [f3];  the  
bishop’s pawn [f2] attacks the knight’s third square [g3] and the king’s 
third square [e3]; the king’s pawn [e2] attacks the bishop’s third square 
[f3] and the queen’s third square [d3]; the queen’s pawn [d2] attacks the 
king’s third square [e3] and the bishop’s third square [c3]; the bishop’s 
pawn [c2] attacks the queen’s third square [d3] and the knight’s third 
square [b3]; the knight’s pawn [b2] attacks the bishop’s third square [c3] 
and the rook’s third square [a3]; and the rook’s pawn [a2] attacks the 
knight’s third square [b3] and nothing else. Consequently, people called 
the rooks’ pawns half-pawns because of their inability to attack like the 
other pawns. They were mistaken, however, because the rooks’ pawns are 
able to attack like any of the other pawns when they move outside of their 
file. Although, it can be said that the rooks’ pawns possess less virtue than 
the other pawns, in the same way that some men have more power than 
others. Those who possess less power do not stop being men completely, 
because it is necessary that men are not all equal. We will address why 
some pawns are better than others in this army in the chapter about the 
qualities and advantages of each pawn.
Before we move ahead, it should be noted that in Italy the pawn can 
avoid capture by virtue of its first move. In addition to shielding the king 
or any other piece that is susceptible to check, the pawn places itself in 
front of the piece in check. This move is permissible, however, only if the 
opponent agrees, because it is not fair, and it is foolish, to say that a pawn 
can move freely in the area that the enemy captured without risk and 
danger, but only if the enemy were to allow it to move freely. If the enemy 
125. The entire title is Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis (The Cornelian law of assassins 
and poisoners). “If anyone defends himself against a murderer, it is not considered a moral 
offense.” Lucius Cornelius Sulla (138–78 b.c.) implemented the law in 81 b.c.
126. “All laws and all rights allow you to defend yourself from violence with violence.” 
The Digest of Justinian 9.2.45.

62 BooK I
wants to capture it in passing, it may.127 In this way, the enemy watches 
out for its own good more so than the opponent’s welfare. Consequently, 
the enemy can allow the pawn to pass his pawn if he deems it beneficial; 
otherwise, he can capture it one square back, which is where the pawn 
would normally be. The strategy described as passing freely would reflect 
the army’s operating procedure in Castile and Portugal, but not in Italy, 
because passing freely in the area that the enemy controls is contrary to 
the purpose of war.128 In the booklet that Damiano wrote about chess, he 
says: “Una pedona non puo passare battaglia de altra pedona quando se 
da scacco al’re per coprire con essa. Altro modo puo passare se vole el con-
trario. Et se no puo pigliar la in la via, anchora che meglio faria non po-
tere passare battaglia.”129 These are Damiano’s words, worthy, by the way, 
of such a teacher, because as soon as he says the pawn can avoid capture 
with the permission of the enemy, all is well. I do not see a reason to say 
that this move is not allowable in order to protect the king from check, 
because it is the enemy’s prerogative to capture the pawn in its path, one 
square back, and to place the king in check as well. If the enemy does not 
want to capture the pawn, it does itself no harm, because we are able to 
overcome the paths that our enemy obstructs in two ways: with his per-
mission or, as it were, by chance and exposing ourselves to whatever may 
127. This move, known as en passant (in passing), permits one pawn to capture another 
pawn when they are adjacent. The pawn that is white, for example, is on its fifth rank (e5), 
and the pawn that is black begins on its second rank (d7), as if it were the beginning of the 
game. When the pawn that is black moves its permissible two squares forward (d5), it will 
find itself on the same rank as the pawn that is white. The pawn that is white captures the 
opposing pawn (e5 x d5), leaving its file (e) and entering a different file (d). Any pawn that 
moves two squares, instead of one, past the square where it could have been captured, can 
be captured en passant. The en passant capture is valid only after a pawn moves two squares 
from its starting square, and only on the opposing player’s very next move, not later in the 
game.
128. Spain and France fought several wars for control of Spain’s territories in Italy. These 
conflicts on Italian soil did not end until the signing of the Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis in 
1559, two years before Lópe
z published his book on chess.
129. “One player cannot pass battle with his pawn to cover a check [to move a piece 
between the opponent’s piece that gives check and his king] to his king by an opposing 
pawn. It can move to another square, though, which may still be effective even if not better 
than passing battle” (translation mine). With respect to Italy’s non passar battaglia, Murray 
writes that “a Pawn could not be played past the attack of a Pawn on the opponent’s fifth 
rank to cover a check” (A History of Chess, 833).

 BooK I                                                    63
happen. The pawn that avoids capture takes its chances, because it passes 
by the area that its enemy occupies. Regardless of the reasons that the 
pawn moves one way or another, the enemy may capture it and prevent 
it from advancing. The pawn can, if it wants, move in a way that places 
itself in danger, exposing itself to whatever may happen, or if commanded 
by its king, the pawn can move and risk its life as it performs its duty, 
which is what happens when it protects the king. Damiano’s rule with 
respect to this move is not found anywhere else, as far as I know, nor do 
I know where I would have seen it practiced or what reason there would 
have been for such a rule.
The pawns, which Xerxes called commoners, were placed in front 
of other pieces, as if we were to say in front of nobility. First, it is not 
fair that the nobility be in the same place as the commoners, but rather 
that the commoners be in front of the nobility, prepared to attend to the 
ministries and purposes by which they can serve the nobility. As Tullius 
says in Timaeus: “Non est rectum minori parere maiorem.”130 Second, it 
is beneficial to be separated from the royal council, like those who are in-
experienced in things of war and who are far from understanding them, 
and like those who have dedicated their lives to them, and who leave the 
counsel to their elders. They are prepared to do whatever is commanded 
of them. Third, the commoners are positioned to defend the main pieces. 
Even if many of the pawns were taken, they would not be missed as much 
as a noble would be if it were taken. If a noble is missing from this mili-
tia, it is difficult to achieve victory. War is also composed of common-
ers, who, as we have said, benefit from defending the country in times of 
strife. A commoner is very apt to fight if taught and tolerates the job very 
well. As Vegetius says in book 1, chapter 3 of De re militari: “numquam 
credo potuisse dubitari aptiorem armis rusticam plebem, quae sub diuo 
et in labore nutritur, solis patiens, umbrae neglegens, balnearum nescia, 
deliciarum ignara, simplicis animi, paruo contenta, duratis ad omnem 
laborum tolerantiam membris, cui gestare ferrum, fossam ducere, onus 
130. “It would not be right for the greater to obey the lesser.” Timaeus is one of Plato’s 
dialogues that Cicero translated into Latin, c. 360 b.c.

64 BooK I
ferre consuetudo de rure est.”131 In chapter 7: “Fabros ferrarios carpen-
tarios, macellarios et ceruorum, aprorumque uenatores conuenit sociare 
mi litiae.”132
We conclude this chapter now, but we will say something more about 
this information later. Now, we will address the quality and advantage of 
each pawn.
chapter 16
In which the quality and advantage of each pawn,  
as well as which pawns are good for one thing and 
which pawns are good for another, are explained
The pawns are generally judged to be of equal virtue, power, and use be-
cause they move and capture similarly. After they become queens, how-
ever, nothing differentiates them, because all of the pawns exercise the 
queen’s functions. The pawns, although seemingly equal to one another, 
are deceptive because some are better for one thing and others for some-
thing else.
The king’s pawn and the queen’s pawn are better than the others, for 
example, to provoke the enemy and to present a stronger defense so that 
the opposing pawns do not have easy access to the king’s and queen’s own 
pawns. The pawns that are freer to move do so in order to stop the ene-
my. They are more effective and can be the most appreciated of all of the 
pawns, because they are able to maneuver the main areas of the battlefield. 
It is for this reason that the other pawns in their way are not as threaten-
ing nor have an advantage to become a queen. Consequently, the king’s 
and queen’s pawns must be protected or, at least, replaced by other pawns.
131. “No one, I believe, can doubt that the peasants are the most qualified to carry arms, 
for they have been raised in all kinds of weather and have been brought up to the hardest la-
bor from their infancy. They are able to endure the greatest heat of the sun, are unacquaint-
ed with the use of baths, and are strangers to the other luxuries of life. They are unskilled, 
simple-minded, content with little, accustomed to all kinds of fatigue, and prepared in some 
measure for a military life by their continual employment in their country-work, in han-
dling the spade, digging ditches, and carrying burdens.”
132. “Blacksmiths, carpenters, butchers, and deer hunters agreed to join the military.”

 BooK I                                                    65
The bishops’ pawns are better than the other pawns for two reasons. 
One, they can penetrate the enemy’s formation and move freely toward 
the opposing pieces. As a result of breaking up the enemy’s line, they ma-
nipulate the opposing pieces to render them unable to fight on the battle-
field or to help their own. The pawn that is most apt for this penetration 
is the bishop’s pawn because it creates an advantage for the king’s pawn. 
The good players generally capitalize on this advantage, which will be ad-
dressed in the section on how to arrange the games. So, as I was saying, 
the bishop’s pawn is more apt and propitious to unnerving the opposition 
because it is closest to the king against whom the war is waged, and its 
location makes it less vulnerable. The bishop’s pawn that is closest to the 
queen [c2 and c7] is able to withstand an attack more when the first move 
is with the queen’s pawn, which is common. It is not unwise to pursue 
this tactic, as the discussion about ways to move pieces will illustrate.
In addition to what has been said about the bishop’s pawn, it possesses 
another advantage. Since the bishop’s pawn is the guardian of the king’s 
and queen’s pawns, it is the most propitious when it does not attack and 
defend, because it can protect the king effectively and defend the bishop’s 
attack against the transposed king.133 It is for these reasons, therefore, as 
well as others that any good player will know, the bishop’s pawn is the 
most effective of all of the pawns. Consequently, when a pawn has an ad-
vantage, it is generally the bishop’s pawn, but when it is removed, the king 
is in grave danger of being attacked and confounded by its opponents.
The bishop’s pawn, therefore, demonstrates that it is the main one for 
defense and offense, as well as penetration of the enemy’s line. Further-
more, the king does not have more than one defense against the queen’s 
check and that of the other pieces that help the queen. In other words, it 
does not have more protection than the knight’s pawn. On the queen’s 
side, however, even if the queen’s bishop’s pawn were not there, the queen 
would still be protected by the bishop, the knight’s pawn, and her own 
pawn.
133. Transposition is a sequence of moves that produces the same result as a different 
sequence of moves. The king may be transposed, for example, during castling, which occurs 
when the king moves two squares in the direction of a rook and the rook occupies the square 
on the other side of the king.

66 BooK I
Even if the queen’s bishop’s pawn were not there, the knight’s, the 
bishop’s, and the queen’s pawns would defend the king. Consequently, 
a player should always have these four pawns positioned in front and as 
a squad, and they are able to provide a strong defense because they rep-
resent half of the participants. Vegetius shows us how they are suitable 
for the organization in a war in chapter 17 of book 3 of De re militari: 
“Si bellatorum tibi copia non abundat, melius est aciem habere breviorem 
dummodo in subsidiis conloces plurimos. Nam circa medias partes cam-
pi ex peditibus bene armatis debes habere lectissimos, de quibus cuneum 
facias et statim aciem hostium rumpas.” It says: If you do not have many 
warriors, it is better to have a skilled army as long as you can place many 
warriors where it is necessary to help. The best warriors should be placed 
closest to the well-armed pawns’ half of the battlefield, where they can 
form a squad and then break up the enemy’s line.
The king’s knight’s pawn and the rook’s pawn can defend the king in 
his transposition better than any other pawn. You must be warned that 
those pawns, where the king is transposed, now belong to the king’s side, 
or the queen’s side, if the king is transposed to a place where he should 
not move unless necessary (e.g., to give the king a home if he finds himself 
in a predicament, and sometimes to capture an opposing piece, especially 
one that annoys the player). Toward this end, the rook’s pawn is usual-
ly more advantageous than the knight’s pawn, nevertheless the knight’s 
pawn often is effective as well, according to the arrangement of the pieces 
on the board. These pawns can be advantageous according to the progress 
of the game. With respect to this move, I do not prescribe a rule by force, 
but rather as an option according to how the player believes the game is 
progressing. If the king were already transposed, however, I advise him 
not to move for an unimportant reason.
Since the pawns are moved, the enemy is able to position itself more 
easily, especially if the king is not transposed toward that part of the 
board. In this way, however, it is not advantageous to move the pawns to 
the side where the king is transposed, because it is not advisable for the 
pawns to be on the same side as the opponent’s transposed king. Instead, 
the king engages in combat with the enemy and breaks up its line, but 

 BooK I                                                    67
only with caution and discretion. The king should be accompanied by its 
men in a way that the game determines: the quality of the move and the 
progress in the game. We conclude with this explanation the special fea-
tures of the pawns and the differences between them with respect to how 
to gain an advantage.
Now, before we move forward, I want to address the shape that each 
one of the eight pawns had previously. As is the case with the other piec-
es, what is said about the pawns on one side is understood to apply to the 
pawns on the other side. The explanation will be based on the same align-
ment of the pieces. It is profitable to know what Jacobus de Cessolis says 
about the king’s pawn. Some may be pleased to learn what he says about 
the king’s pawn. It does not pertain to our purpose, however, because its 
explanation and application are different from our own, as we noted sev-
eral times and will point out again later on.
chapter 17
In which the previous shape of the  
king’s pawn is described
The discussion about the shape that the pawns had in the past will follow 
the same order of pieces, beginning with the king’s pawn, which, accord-
ing to Jacobus de Cessolis, resembled the shape of the common man. The 
pawn had a scale and a weight in the right hand, a measuring rod in the 
left hand, and a bag full of money on the belt. Together, these items repre-
sent three professions. The money changers and the barterers use the scale 
for the different purposes for which it is used today in the cities, where 
people come from all different places and with a variety of different coins. 
With the measuring rod, the merchants measured cloth and everything 
else that is measured. The bag of money on the belt represents the keepers 
of money and other such things, who had audiences with the king, which 
suggests that they oversaw the king’s treasures in the past so that they 
could pay soldiers and representatives of the republic their due salaries. 
All of them should avoid avarice, keep their promises, pay what they owe, 
and provide full restitution of the deposits.

68 BooK I
chapter 18
In which the previous shape of the  
queen’s pawn is described
The pawn that is in front of the queen, or lady, was described in this way: 
a man seated in a chair or a magisterial pulpit, with a book in his right 
hand and a pot filled with aromatic essences in the left hand; the belt is 
replete with tools to treat wounds and injuries–it is understood that the 
queen’s pawn represents a doctor. Furthermore, it is understood that the 
open book is appropriate for a studious doctor, who is proficient in all of 
the parts and arts that are necessary to achieve perfection in his profes-
sion. The pulpit represents his obligation to teach them to anyone who 
wishes to practice that profession. In order for the doctor to be perfect, 
he must know grammar so that he can understand well the authors. In 
addition, he must know rhetoric, for example, in order to know how to 
offer, arrange, treat, and make understood what he purports to show, and 
how to appeal to the will of those with whom he deals; logic, in order to 
know how to propose, to discern, and to argue scientific things; philos-
ophy, for the knowledge of their causes; geometry, in order to know the 
circumstances; arithmetic, in order to know the hours and critical days; 
music, in order to know how to understand the harmony and the compo-
sition of the human body; astrology, in order to know how to distinguish 
the times when to give medicine, keeping in mind the diverse effects that 
different times cause, in accordance with the signs and planets that reign, 
and that most important is what the moon does in its rising, growth, and 
decreasing. All of these arts make up the perfect doctor.
The pot represents the apothecaries, who are joined together with 
the doctors. With respect to the surgeons’ instruments on the belt, one 
pawn is placed in the name of three because they belong to all of them.134 
The pawn is placed in front of the queen, or lady, to imply that because 
of their professions, they have to interact with all types of people, and 
134. In other words, the queen’s pawn should represent doctor, apothecary, and sur-
geon, all three.

 BooK I                                                   69
it behooves them to have good habits: a refined manner with words in 
order to converse pleasurably and reasonably; corporal chastity; ability to 
restore the sick to good health; frequent visits to the sick; deep concern; 
and knowledge of cures, causes, and the signs of illnesses; and many other 
things that I omit for the sake of brevity.
Since chastity is the virtue that best serves them, they are placed in 
front of the queen. It is necessary to be chaste because they have to cure 
women’s illnesses and see the members and hidden parts of their bodies. 
Furthermore, they should model chastity to others, following the exam-
ple of their teacher Hippocrates, whom Valerius Maximus describes as 
being of marvelous continence. In Athens, the main city of Greece, where 
the good arts are taught, there was a noble and very beautiful prostitute 
to whom the disciples promised a talent, which according to our calcu-
lation was worth six hundred ducats, if she could convert the teacher’s 
inclinations to incontinence.135 She, confident in her great beauty, came 
to him at night and laid down next to him, but she was unable to disturb 
his abstinence. Another day, the disciples made fun of her because nei-
ther her beauty nor her charm had been capable of corrupting the spirit 
of that famous doctor. When they asked the price of the bet, she respond-
ed that she had bet them that she could attract a man, and not a statue, 
with her beauty, indicating that the philosopher and doctor was a statue 
because of his unmovable abstinence. I could provide other examples, but 
I will omit them for the sake of brevity.
chapt
er 19
In which the previous shape of the  
king’s bishop’s pawn is described
Another pawn is placed before the king’s bishop, shaped in the following 
way: a man with a pair of scissors in his right hand; a large and wide knife 
in his left hand; writing utensils on his belt; and, on his right ear, a quill 
135. Hippocrates (c. 460–c. 375 b.c.) was an ancient Greek physician who is often re-
ferred to as the “Father of Medicine.”

70 BooK I
to write. The writing utensils and quill indicate that he represents the no-
taries and scribes. It is for this reason that he is situated in front of the 
bishop, who is like a judge, as we mentioned in another place. The large 
scissors indicate that he represents those whom we call tailors, menders, 
shearers, weavers, barbers, and other people of this kind. The knife rep-
resents the leather tanners and butchers. It is the duty of the judge, with 
the scribe’s testimony, to ensure that these functions are performed with-
out fault. It is beneficial for the scribes and the notaries to inform the 
judges of what is done in service of the people.
chapter 20
In which the previous shape of the queen’s  
bishop’s pawn is described
The pawn that is in front of the queen’s bishop had this shape: a man with 
his right hand extended, like someone who invites another to stay at his 
home; in his left hand there is a glass of wine next to a piece of bread; 
and there is a handful of keys on his belt. The queen’s bishop’s pawn rep-
resents taverners, pub owners, and innkeepers. They place themselves be-
fore the queen’s bishop, as if before a judge, so that they will be punished 
corporally if they do not fulfill their duty. Consequently, they are placed 
before a judge, whose profession is the punishment of delinquents. Their 
role is to prepare good food for those who require their services, and they 
must be affectionate with them and trustworthy in protecting whatever 
the guests bring. The left hand with the bread and wine represents the 
delicacies of the first [taverners]. Second, the extended right hand rep-
resents the affection and diligence with which they [pub owners] please 
their guests. Third, the keys on the belt represent the third profession 
[innkeepers].

 BooK I                                                    71
chapter 21
In which the previous shapes of the  
king’s knight’s pawn and the queen’s knight’s pawn 
are described
Another pawn is placed before the king’s knight’s pawn in this way: a 
man with a hammer in his right hand, an adze in his left hand, and a 
plumb on his belt. The hammer represents the blacksmiths, artisans, 
silversmiths and the like. The adze represents the carpenters, engravers, 
and others of similar ilk. The plumb represents the bricklayers, quarry 
workers, and the like. These professions are placed before the knight be-
cause all of them are necessary to make weapons and to make bits, spurs, 
and saddles for the horses, as well as shelters and strongholds where the 
knights go and defend against their enemies and their kingdom.
Another pawn is placed before the queen’s knight, with this shape: a 
man with large keys in his right hand, a baton in his left hand, an open 
pouch on his belt, and a sword on the other side. The keys and the sword 
represent the city’s guards, and the baton represents the public officials, 
what we call in Spain faithful executors and functionaries who are re-
sponsible for verifying weights and measures. The open pouch represents 
the  collectors  of  things  that  are  owed  to  the  community  and  whom  
we call in Spain the municipal government’s servants. Correctly and 
with reason, these pawns are placed in front of the knights because the 
knights, mainly, are required to be the defenders of the city and the re-
public.
chapt
er 22
In which the previous shape of the king’s  
rook’s pawn is described
A pawn is in front of the king’s rook, and it was shaped in this way: a 
man with a hoe in his right hand, a rod in his left hand, and a sickle or 
shears on his belt. Consequently, the farmer, to whom these three things 

72 BooK I
are useful, is represented. The hoe represents the farmers because they 
cultivate the land with a hoe, before the use of plows, and even after. The 
rod represents the shepherds and people who keep livestock and use what 
we call a goad to herd them in a direction and to bring back the older, 
grazing livestock. The sickle represents the reapers and those who culti-
vate and prune the vines, cut what is bad from the trees, and cultivate the 
gardens.
Agriculture is defined by these three things, and the profession of 
farmer largely consists of these three things.136 Since the farmers provide 
the land and kingdom of all that is necessary to human life with respect 
to provisions, they are placed in front of the king’s vicar to imply that it is 
the duty of the king’s vicar and governor to make sure that the kingdom 
is well provided. All of these details are from Jacobus, except for some 
things that do not make sense or are ignorant, which we place in better 
order than he does. Since it is my intention to reprimand him not in the 
images that he proposes, but rather in the practice, I will not say here if 
he tells the truth that the profession of farmer consists of the three afore-
mentioned things, regardless of how many other things, which would be 
a lengthy list, are necessary for the perfection of agriculture, according 
to Pliny, Columella, Varro, Cato, Virgil, Palladio, and many more, all of 
whom should be read in order to find out everything about this subject.137 
Since I am not going to occupy myself any more, I will conclude these de-
scriptions, saying what the pawn in front of the queen’s rook means.
136. Hoe, staff, and sickle.
137. Columella (Lucius Junius Moderatus Columella; 4–70 a.d.) was a well-known 
Roman soldier and farmer who authored books about agriculture, including De re rustica 
(Agriculture), which consists of twelve volumes. Varro (Marcus Terentius Varro; 116–27 
b.c.) was a prolific author whose only complete extant book is Rerum rusticarum libri tres 
(Three books on agriculture). Palladio (Andrea Palladio; 1508–1580) was a Venetian archi-
tect whose numerous buildings and publications established him as one of the most influ-
ential architects of all time. His building designs included agricultural villas, which were 
previously farm outbuildings.

 BooK I                                                    73
chapter 23
In which the previous shape of the  
queen’s rook’s pawn is described
The pawn that is in front of the queen’s rook was described, according to 
Jacobus de Cessolis, in this manner: a man with many curls; in the right 
hand he has some money, and in his left hand he has three dice; his belt 
is a rope; and he has a backpack full of cards. The money represents folly, 
because even were he to have a surplus of goods, matched by the number 
of hairs on his head, if he does not try to keep them, they are lost easily. 
The curly and frizzy hair on this piece represents the character’s devia-
tion from its proper place and conformity, a conformity that would keep 
it from moving in the scattered and disorganized way that its hair does. 
As Ovid says: “Nec minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri. Casus 
inest illic; hoc erit artis opus.”138 It means that it is not less of a virtue to 
conserve than it is to acquire. In acquiring there is fortune, and in con-
serving, art and knowledge. It is for this reason that the popular saying is 
“Qui non cavet expensam, prius mendicat quam sentiat.” It means that he 
who does not keep track of what is spent is the first to become poor and 
to beg.
The pawns, as a necessary good to the kingdom, are placed before the 
vicars and governors. It is beneficial that the pawns be given, therefore, 
a curator, so that they do not squander, steal, or place a hex on goods to 
the detriment of the republic and kingdom. The three dice represent the 
gamblers, meaning that those who practice this profession often do not 
prosper, which prevents them from doing any harm to the kingdom. The 
rope and backpack of cards represent wanderers, whom we call postmen 
in Spain. It is advantageous for them to be diligent and careful when car-
rying and delivering the letters, as well as what belongs to the common 
good, like that which belongs to individuals. The pawns place themselves 
before the vicars and governors because, if they do not do what they are 
told, much harm might follow for which they would be tried and pun-
138. Ars amatoria, book 2, lines 13–14.

74 BooK I
ished. Jacobus de Cessolis concludes the wise philosopher’s account of the 
invention of the game, composed and ordered like a republic, as well as 
other things I will not address that are not pertinent to the game or the 
reason for its invention, as we will discuss. We said that chess is an inven-
tion relating to war.
chapt
er 24
In which the meanings of the pieces and  
the pawns of this game, in the order in which they 
appear, are explained
The previous chapters have taught us the meaning, representation, and 
form of all of the pieces in this game, according to Jacobus de Cessolis’s 
teaching in a treatise that he composed. The board represents a repub-
lic or a kingdom; the pieces and pawns represent the different people, 
strata, and professions in the republic or kingdom, according to what we 
addressed in the previous chapters. We have always refuted that opinion 
and teaching, demonstrating here that the board represents not a city but 
a battlefield with two kings, whose warriors are prepared to do battle. It 
is for this reason that the philosopher showed Amel Evil-Merodach the 
need to protect his subjects in times of peace so that, when the time came, 
he would find them ready and diligent in their service. It is much better 
for princes to make armies with their own soldiers and to prepare them 
for war than it is to hire strangers, as Vegetius illustrates for us in title 28 
of the Proemio: “Utilius enim constat suos erudire armis quam alienos 
mercede conducere.”139 It says it is more useful to ensure that the people 
are more adept with weapons than it is to hire strangers.
The reason for organizing this game as a war was, as we mentioned, 
so that the king understands, as Vegetius says in the third book, title 3 of 
De re militari: “Diuitiarum secura possessio est, nisi armorum defensi-
one seruetur.” It says there is no possession of wealth that is safe unless it 
is guarded with weapons. Consequently, he says in the tenth title of the 
139. De re militari, Proemio 28.

 BooK I                                                    75
same book: “Quis autem dubitet artem bellicam rebus omnibus esse po-
tiorem, per quam libertas retinteur et dignitas, propagantor prouinciae, 
conseruator imperium?” It says, who doubts that the art of war is better 
than all things? Liberty is maintained and the dignity of the province is 
extended thereby, and the empire is preserved. I believe that no one has 
ignored this warlike invention, and if it has been ignored, inform him of 
it with that saying from Martial in book 2: “Insidiosorum si ludis bella 
latronum, gemmeus iste tibi miles et hostis erit.”140 It means that if you 
play the game of war with bandits who ambush, this piece of glass, or an-
other thing that shines, can serve either as a soldier or as the enemy. If 
placed on your side, it will be your soldier; if placed on the other side, it 
will be your enemy. And Ovid: “Sive latrocinii sub imagine calculus ibit, 
fac pereat vitreo miles ab hoste tuus.”141 I could cite many other examples 
and authorities on this subject, but I will not address them because they 
are not necessary on something that is so proven.
Since this game is a warlike invention, it is useful to know what each 
piece represents. With respect to the king and the kingdom, there is no 
doubt, because the king represents the lord and prince of the warriors. 
The queen, or lady, represents the marshal of this army, in imitation of 
the Amazons, as we declared earlier. Consequently, after the king, she is 
the most important, and her virtue, power, and movement prepare her to 
bring aid for whatever is necessary. If anyone were to doubt this, saying 
that in the old game, according to what we said in the chapter on the 
queen, she did not advance except from square to square, which was a sign 
that she did not represent the marshal, I would respond, saying that the 
queen’s movement from square to square does not appear to be uniform 
in other nations as it was with the Moors. In fact, we saw it used to the 
contrary before that. If it were so, then the kings of those parts of Persia, 
where the game was invented, went to war accompanied by their wives, as 
we said earlier. Even though advancing one square at a time served little 
in the game, she still represented the queen. We grant that it is this way, 
140. Epigrams 14.20.
141. “If your piece moves as if in a war, make sure that your soldier dies at the hands of 
the glass enemy.” Ars amatoria, book 2, lines 207–8.

76 BooK I
because in all of the nations in which this game is played, it has always 
been celebrated with a woman’s name, after which she was given the vir-
tue of marshal. If we acknowledge it for how the name sounds, and not 
for its power, we can accept her as the king’s wife. In addition, the queen 
is the most extravagant of all in the army, according to what the poets’ 
and authors’ books tell us, like Atalanta, Harpalyce, and several more I 
could mention, notwithstanding the ones that Ariosto, etc. describe.142 
We will address this subject more in the chapter about the queen.
According to Damiano, the bishops mean princes. It is said to be 
the reason that they are closer to the king and the queen than any oth-
er piece. Damiano is greatly mistaken, however, because he doesn’t know 
what this game represents. If he had known, he would not have placed so 
few a number of warriors with so many princes. The inventor of the game 
would not have made them almost equal to the knights and inferior to 
the rooks. Damiano’s mistake was due to the name, which in Italian is 
Delfino.143 These bishops do not represent satellites, as some people have 
said, because satellite means a salaried soldier who does not leave the em-
peror’s side; now we call them guard soldiers because this profession is 
practiced in times of both peace and war.144 If the bishop were a guard 
soldier, it would be best if he were in the second line, with those on foot, 
because he would be a soldier on foot and not on horse. But that would 
not be appropriate, because of the virtue and power the bishop uses in 
this game.
Here we present a brief instruction on war: it is most advantageous 
if there are people delegated for the needs and governance of war. My 
point of view, therefore, is the bishops signify and represent what we call 
142.  Atalanta  was  a  famous  huntress  from  Greek  mytholog y,  whose  courage  and  
strength earned her much acclaim. Harpalyce was the daughter of Harpalycus, who trained 
his daughter to be a warrior and to succeed him as ruler of the Amynmei in Thrace (in 
southeastern Europe).
143. Historically, delfino, or delfín, was the word to describe the heir apparent to the 
throne or a successor. In European chess, the bishop was known as the Alfil, and it later 
became Arfil in Spanish and Delfino in Italian.
144. The word satellite derives from the Latin word satelles, which means attendant. 
L
ópez asserts that the “salaried soldier” is an example of an attendant because he serves the 
emperor.

 BooK I                                                   77
tribunos militum.145 In our language, they are called infantry captains, 
or the words that come close, which are second lieutenant infantry. The 
horses represent the knights, and the rooks, vicars, which is another main 
profession in war.146 It is the reason, therefore, the rooks are on the last 
squares, one might say, the horns of the battle, which is necessary as Vege-
tius tells us in title 17, book 3 of De re militari: “Optima ratio est et ad 
uictoriam plurimum confert, ut lectissimos de peditibus et equitibus cum 
uicarris comitibus tribunisque uacantibus habeat dux post aciem praep-
aratos, alios circa cornua alios circa medium, ut, sicubi hostis uehement-
er insistit, ne rumpatur acies, prouolent subito et suppleant loca addi-
taque uirtute inimicorum audaciam frangant.” It means that in order to 
achieve victory, it is most reasonable and advantageous that the captain 
choose the best foot soldiers, whom we call infantry, with the vicars who 
accompany them, and with the tribunes, who do not fight and are behind 
the army. Some foot soldiers are close to the army’s edges, and others are 
in the middle so that if the enemy were to advance vehemently in any 
place, they can come swiftly, occupy all places with virtue and force, and 
destroy the army’s boldness.
Others said that the rooks represented the centurions, and others, 
magistri equitum, whom we call in our language the captain of the king’s 
guard. It is the case that the rooks are separated from the king, but later 
they join him in order to defend him. They always remain on their rank, 
defending it, and it is beneficial for them to leave their rank only when 
they help their army and attack the enemy. This situation does not please 
me, because this duty belongs to one man, not two, and it was not neces-
sary that two should go. If it were to be said that one man serves as the 
king’s guard and another serves as the queen’s guard, I would respond, 
saying that this arrangement is not necessary: the queen does not have a 
guard, because she defends them. But if for one reason or another, a per-
son chose one of the professions that each piece represents, may he choose 
145. “Military tribunes.”
146. In chapter 14 of book 1, L
ópe
z states that the rooks represent the king’s vicars. The 
Spanish translation of this word is vicario, the meaning of which L
ópez illustrates in the 
following sentence from chapter 14: “Since the king could not be in all places at once, the 
rooks could govern and rule by authority of the king.”

78 BooK I
it freely and with the understanding that he participates in a war, like a 
colonel or a maestre de campo.147 Everyone knows that the horses repre-
sent men who fight on horseback, like men of weapons or light riders.148 
The pawns represent all of the infantry. The rooks are called by this name 
because once a rook is placed at the edges of its army, it is like a rock that 
strongly protects its own men.
chapter 25
In which the meanings of simple check,  
double check, checkmate, and stalemate, as well as 
the reason the king in check does not leap,  
are explained
With respect to what is discussed here, we have to note that simple check 
is nothing more than a threat that one of the king’s enemies gives to him, 
which makes the king move from where he is if unable to remedy the sit-
uation. As a result of the violence that ensues, and without the power to 
jump, the king moves tormented from square to square. In this way, to 
place in check means to force the king to move from the square he occu-
pies. Often, when it is simple check, there is a remedy, which we call cover, 
and other times there is not, such as when someone is unsuspecting and 
careless and, consequently, not able to mount a defense.
There are other doubled checks, which we call double check, and it is 
not possible to cover the king nor find a solution against it, because it is 
an attack by two enemies from different directions. In this situation, it is 
best for the king to abandon that square and flee to another where he can 
be helped. These checks occur by discovery of a piece, moving another 
piece, or by a pawn. The pawn or whatever piece is played gives check, and 
the king is also in check from the piece by discovery.149 This discovery is 
147. The maestre de campo was the commander of ten infantry companies; each com-
pany consisted of three hundred soldiers (Tracy, Emperor Charles V, Impresario of War, 31).
148. Men of weapons were soldiers who fought on horseback and wore a suit of armor. 
Light riders were soldiers who rode horses that did not wear a protective vest over their bod-
ies. The horses were quicker and more agile than horses that did wear a protective vest.
149. Discovery, also known as a discovered attack, is a tactic by which a player moves a 

 BooK I                                                    79
possible with all of the pieces and the pawns, according to what the game 
can offer, but it is not possible to play all of the pieces by discovery. It is 
beneficial to know that discovery can result in a double check: the player 
discovers the queen with a pawn by way of capturing that pawn or a piece 
or the opposing pawn, giving check and leaving the file free. It is executed 
by discovering a bishop, a knight, or a rook.
The bishop and the knight are capable of more when they discover a 
rook. A bishop can be discovered by a rook or a knight. The player can 
give check in all of these ways except with the knight, because the knight 
does not have to cover or discover it. Since this check has force, as if we 
were talking about two moves, even if the pieces that give check could be 
taken, it is not possible in one move. There is not a player who can play 
two moves before his opponent plays. It is for this reason that a double 
check does not have cover or protection because, as I have said, it is an 
attack by two enemies from different directions. Only the king can take 
one of the pieces that give him double check, if he were disposed to do 
so, and not another piece, because the king is the only piece that can find 
itself in double check. Only the king alone, if he were to find himself able 
to do it, would be able to provide a solution, taking one and defending 
himself against the other, as if we were to say killing one and escaping 
from the other.
There are two other types of check: one that is called simply mate, 
and the other, which is called stalemate. Checkmate is when the king is 
given check, and as a result of this injury he is killed without defense, or, 
as we said, he is taken to prison and unable to escape, because his enemies 
have possession of the paths where he would be able to save himself. This 
circumstance is called mate, which is also checkmate, because the king is 
unable to escape.
Stalemate is the result that does not take place with the violence of 
checkmate, because the king is placed in check first, and then checkmate. 
Where there is not a check, as I have said, there cannot be mate. It is for 
pawn or a piece to reveal another of its own that is in a line of attack. The pawn or the piece 
that the player moves may also represent a threat.

80 BooK I
this reason that the mate is called check and mate.150 Stalemate is noth-
ing more than enclosing the king in a space where any other piece cannot 
help him so that it is suitable for the king to give up. This predicament is 
called in this game stalemate when the king cannot move or play with a 
pawn or a piece, because it is a sign that the king needs help. When the 
king does not have a play, then it is a stalemate.
It is a good time to declare that the game has three parts, similar to 
three cases of war: mate, which represents death or imprisonment of the 
king; simplification, which is the destruction of the enemy camp; and 
stalemate, which is, as stated previously, the immobilization of the king 
from a place where he cannot move or be rescued. As a result of the death 
or the imprisonment of the king, the opposing king becomes lord of his 
lands. Consequently, the opposing king earns double the property, which 
was the case in Castile and Portugal, when one eliminates all the pieces, 
or the opposing king can return to the enemy as a free person, losing half, 
but not all, to show that, even though the king is free, he is at a great 
loss. When the king appears to be stalemated but is still alive, although in 
this great predicament, there is a place to reach an agreement in which no 
more than half is lost. Since the rules of war on which the game is mod-
eled are most observed in Spain, the game is played better there than any-
where else. In Italy, nothing is earned with simplification or stalemate, as 
they do not take into consideration what has been said here.151
chapt
er 26
In which the reason the white squares  
of the board, and not the black squares, are on the 
player’s right is explained
Generally, all players, when they initiate the game, endeavor to make sure 
that the last squares, the king’s rook for the white pieces and the queen’s 
rook for the black pieces, are white. It is for this reason that each player’s 
150. The word checkmate in Spanish inherently contains and: jaque y mate.
151. L
ópe
z addresses here each country’s conventions for the game of chess.

 BooK I                                                    81
white square is on the right hand side. No one to this day has said—or 
I have not heard them say—the reason, except that it is how it is done. 
Since we have learned it this way and there is no other reason or explana-
tion, we are at a standstill. Some players, who do not believe the position 
of the board makes a difference, sometimes play the board turned around, 
believing facetiously that they are innovative, saying that one side or the 
other does not make a difference. A closer look at the situation, however, 
as we stated above, reveals that the players who change how the game is 
intended to be played do not play well.
First, the queens will not match up correctly if they change places, as 
illustrated in the chapter about the queen. Second, because the bishops 
represented judges of civil and criminal causes, the king’s bishop that is 
white is on a white square because he represents a judge of civil causes, 
according to Jacobus de Cessolis’s teaching, which we explained earlier. 
Since earlier we contradicted this teaching, it is not, in my opinion, a suf-
ficient reason. A more sufficient reason is the ancientness of its use, be-
cause it has so much force that it would be difficult to change it, especial-
ly if there is not a good reason to do so. As Aristotle in book 7, chapter 11 
of Ethicas writes: “Consuetudo naturae assimilatur.”152 It means, custom 
ought to resemble nature. Idem in the first book, chapter 20 of Retho-
ricorum: “Consuetudo est similis naturae.”153 It means that the custom 
is similar to the nature. Consequently, as the same book says in chapter 
21: “Omnes enim consueta observant.”154 All follow customs. As it says 
in book 2, chapter 3 of the Metaphysica: “Nam consuetum notius.”155 It 
means that what is habit is more noteworthy and also more pleasurable 
than that which is not a habit. Idem Problemata, part 19: “Consuetum 
delectabile est magis inconsueto.”156 It seems that we are correct, because 
if the board were turned to its width, it would appear to be wider than 
152. Nicomachean Ethics, book 7, chapter 11.
153. Aristotle, Rhetoric, book 1, chapter 20.
154. Aristotle, Rhetoric, book 1, chapter 21.
155. Aristotle, Metaphysics, book 2, chapter 3.
156. Aristotle, Problems, book 19: “That which is familiar is always more pleasant than 
what is unfamiliar” (translation is my own). Aristotle’s Problems is a collection of nine hun-
dred problems that appear in question and answer form.

82 BooK I
it is long with respect to the battlefield and the space it holds outside of 
the frame. Consequently, the board would violate the arithmetic reason 
and geometry on which this invention is founded. According to what we 
stated at the beginning, the board consists of a straight line in longitude 
and also in latitude, the width of which is equal to the length, divided 
into eight equal lines at any point. In order to understand how to play 
the game, the longitudinal line is imagined first, and it is ordained that 
the game can begin by placing the pieces within these lines, prepared to 
move forward.
In order for this arrangement to be known more easily, although 
it is not the essence of the game, the boards are made longer than they 
are wide. If all of the sides were equal, as if it were a square invention, it 
would not be possible to know where the game began, for in many parts 
of the world, there are not boards but rather a square without distinction. 
In which case, we will return to what was said earlier about the board. 
In addition, it is worthwhile to note that the board is divided into four 
parts, and it is useful to know that one-half belongs to the king that is 
white and the other half to the king that is black. The white part of the 
board is divided into two parts, the king’s part and the queen’s part, and 
it is the same on the black part of the board.
chapt
er 27
In which how to move the chess pieces,  
how to capture them, how to play from memory,  
as well as aspects that must be considered,  
are explained
Whoever wants to learn more about chess than how to arrange the board 
so that the last square on the right side is white, needs to know that there 
are eight main pieces, as well as the same number of pawns, on both sides 
of the board. These are the names of the pieces: king, queen or lady, king’s 
bishop, queen’s bishop, king’s knight, queen’s knight, king’s rook, and 
queen’s rook. They are arranged in the following way: The king that is 
white is on a black square, the fourth one on the first line, because the 

 BooK I                                                    83
pieces are placed here, to the right; after the king, the king’s bishop is next 
to the king on a white square; the queen is to the left of the king on a 
white square on the other half of the rank; then, the queen’s bishop on a 
black square. Furthermore, for the sake of knowing more, all three of the 
king’s pieces (bishop, knight, and rook) on his side are called the king’s 
pieces, and the same three pieces on the queen’s side are called the q u e e n’ s   
pieces. The same goes for the black pieces, except the arrangement is con-
trary, I mean in contrary squares and on the opposite hand.
Whoever plays with the white pieces has the king and all of his pieces 
on the right hand side, and the queen with her pieces on the left hand 
side. Whoever plays with the black pieces on the other side of the board 
has the king and his pieces on the left hand side, and the queen has her 
pieces on the right hand side. The reason, as we mentioned in a previous 
chapter about the queen, it is appropriate that the kings face each other 
and the queens face each other is because the king’s target is the male and 
the queen’s target is the female. It is for this reason that the king that 
is black has to be placed in the middle of his rank first, and on a white 
square on the left hand side; then, his bishop stands on a black square 
next to him, followed by his knight, and his rook is on the last black 
square. On the right hand side, the queen stands on a black square, and 
then her bishop is on a white square, her knight is on a black square, and 
her rook is on a white square. All of the pawns are placed on the second 
rank, in front of the pieces, but there is no designated order. In addition 
to knowing how to arrange the pieces, it is necessary to know that each 
pawn takes the name of the piece directly behind it.
It is also useful to know that the square that each piece occupies is 
named  for  the  piece:  the  square  that  the  king’s  rook  occupies  is  the  
king’s rook’s square; the square that the knight occupies is called the king’s 
knight’s  square;  the  square  that  the  bishop  occupies  is  called  
the king’s bishop’s square; the square that the king occupies is named the 
king’s square; the square that the queen occupies is called the queen’s 
square; the square that the bishop occupies is the queen’s bishop’s square; 
where the knight is, the queen’s knight’s square; and where the rook is, the 
queen’s rook’s square. The same goes for the pawns and their squares: the 

84 BooK I
pawn that is in front of the king’s rook is the king’s rook’s pawn; the 
knight’s pawn is the king’s knight’s pawn; the bishop’s pawn is the king’s 
bishop’s pawn; the pawn in front of the king is the king’s pawn. On the 
other side, the pawn in front of the queen is the queen’s pawn; the bishop’s 
pawn  is  the  queen’s  bishop’s  pawn;  the  knight’s  pawn  is  the  queen’s  
knight’s pawn; and the rook’s pawn is the queen’s rook’s pawn. The pawns 
on the opposite side of the board have the same names.
It is also beneficial to know that the rook’s second square on its file 
is also called the rook’s second square after the rook’s pawn moves, and 
so on with the rest. The knight’s second square is the second square of 
the king’s knight; the bishop’s second square is the second square of the 
king’s bishop; the king’s second square is second square of the king; the 
queen’s second square is the second square of the queen; the bishop’s sec-
ond square is the second square of the queen’s bishop; the knight’s second 
square is the second square of the queen’s knight; and the rook’s second 
square is the second square of the queen’s rook.
It is advisable to continue this pattern as we move toward the middle 
of the chess board because the fourth square is called the fourth square 
of the king’s rook, and the same for the other pieces. What we say about 
one side of the board is applicable to the other side, too. Since many peo-
ple enjoy playing this game by memory, and what we have said is condu-
cive to it, it is useful to know the game well and to understand it. Later, 
we will discuss the ways to play, explaining if a specific piece can play on 
a certain square, as we will see. Since playing by memory requires more 
than what has been said, it is advantageous to explain more.
Three things are required in order to play a game by memory: memo-
ry, good practice, and execution. With respect to practice, in addition to 
what has been said, it is useful to know how to assign a number to each 
of the pieces, beginning to count from the king’s rook until the middle 
of the board. It is also good to know by memory which squares are white 
and which squares are black. Let us take the white pieces as our side: 
the king’s rook’s square will be one and white; the knight’s square will 
be two and black; the bishop’s square will be three and white; the king’s 
square will be four and black; the queen’s square will be five and white; 

 BooK I                                                    85
the queen’s bishop’s square will be six and black; the queen’s knight’s 
square will be seven and white; and the queen’s rook’s square is eight and 
black.157
The second square of the king’s rook, it is nine and black; the knight’s 
second square is ten and white; the bishop’s second square is eleven and 
black; the king’s second square is twelve and white; the queen’s second 
square is thirteen and black; the bishop’s second square is fourteen and 
white; the knight’s second square is fifteen and black; the rook’s second 
square is sixteen and white.
The third square of the rook, where we begin, is seventeen and white; 
the knight’s third square is eighteen and black; the third square of the 
king’s bishop is nineteen and white; the king’s third square is twenty and 
black; the queen’s third square is twenty-one and white; the bishop’s third 
square is twenty-two and black; the knight’s third square is twenty-three 
and white; the rook’s third square is twenty-four and black.
The fourth square of the king’s rook, it is twenty-five and black; the 
knight’s fourth square is twenty-six and white; the bishop’s fourth square 
is twenty-seven and black; the king’s fourth square is twenty-eight and 
white; the queen’s fourth square is twenty-nine and black; the bishop’s 
fourth square is thirty and white; the knight’s fourth square is thirty-one 
and black; the rook’s fourth square is thirty-two and white. It is worth 
noting that there is a black square directly in front and to the side of a 
white square
The squares will be differentiated from each other in the aforemen-
tioned way. Once the squares on one side are learned, the ones on the oth-
er will be known in the same order, and most easily in this manner. Once 
the first rank and each piece’s square on it, whether it is white or black, 
is known, keep in mind and memory that the third rank corresponds to 
the first rank, and the fourth rank to the second rank, with respect to 
black or white squares. Once it is learned that the first square of the king’s 
rook is white, it will be known that the third square will be white, via a 
straight or transverse line. Once it is learned that the second square is 
157. López counts right to left, which is the opposite way from today’s algebraic nota-
tion.

86 BooK I
black, it will be known that the fourth square is black. Consequently, we 
will discover why the squares that belong to the white pieces are white 
and the squares that belong to the black pieces are black.
All of the pieces and pawns are arranged in this way in order to dif-
ferentiate them and to avoid confusion. In addition, this arrangement is 
conducive to the knight’s jump, which is transverse by three and three 
squares, from white to black and black to white, but neither straight nor 
diagonally, as the other pieces move. Some pieces move straight, like 
the queen and the rooks; others move diagonally, like the bishops; oth-
ers move straight and diagonally, like the queens; and others move in all 
directions, like the kings. It is useful for each player to know all of this 
information, but especially the player who wants to play from memory. 
There is another difficulty for the player who wants to play from memory, 
which is—and it is beneficial to know and to keep in mind—where and 
in which direction all of the pieces may move, including the pawn. This 
information can be found above in its places and chapters about each 
piece and the pawns. I will not, therefore, discuss it again here.
There is also another benefit to playing by memory: each square is 
assigned a number until there is a number for each square, concluding 
with the number sixty-four, which makes it easier to memorize the dif-
ferent ranks, beginning with the white king’s rook’s square. It is one, and 
the knight’s square is two; the bishop’s square is three; the king’s square 
is four; the queen’s square is five; the queen’s bishop’s square is six; her 
knight’s square is seven; and her rook’s square is eight. Returning to the 
second rank, the first square of the second rank is nine, and it continues 
in this way until a number is assigned to the queen’s rook’s square on the 
opposing player’s last rank.
In this way, it would be simple to describe a board by its numbers and 
ranks in order to play very easily by memory, doing no more than keep-
ing in mind the names of the pieces in order to differentiate them, as we 
explained. If the player who has the white pieces were to play the king’s 
pawn on the fourth rank and number twenty-eight, the player who plays 
with the black pieces could play the king’s pawn on rank five and number 
thirty-six, and so forth.

 BooK I                                                    87
There are general rules that every player who wants to call himself an 
expert in this art must learn well in order to know how to play. With-
out this knowledge, it would be very easy to make mistakes and careless 
moves that would make it impossible to defeat the enemy. Seneca ad-
dresses this subject in book 1 of De Ira: “In ruinam prona sunt: quae sine 
fundamentis creuere.”158 It says those things that grow without funda-
mentals are set up and inclined to fall. It is for this reason that anyone 
who wants to learn how to play this game should keep the rules in mind.
The first rule is when a game is played on a clear and sunny day, make 
sure the sun is in the enemy’s face so that it blinds him. If it were dark and 
the game were played by light from a fire, make sure that your enemy has 
the fire on his right hand side so that it disturbs his sight; also, make sure 
that the right hand side of the board is in the shade so that he does not 
see well where to play the pieces. Since this game is a bellic invention, as 
we have said, it is useful to search for as many advantages as possible. As 
Vegetius says in book 3, title 14 of De re militari: “Ordinaturus aciem tria 
debet ante prospicere, solem puluerem uentum. Nam sol ante faciem erip-
it uisum, uentus contrarius tua inflectit ac deprimit, hostium aduuat tela, 
puluis a fronte congestus oculos impelet et claudit.” It says the captain 
who prepares his army for the battle has to consider three things first: 
the sun, the dust, and the wind. The sun, when in the face, blinds; the 
opposing wind disconcerts and discourages your army and helps the en-
emy’s army; dust in the face impedes and blinds. Idem: This rule is more 
noteworthy if you are indifferent to the pieces with which you play. If you 
see that your enemy has the habit of playing with the same pieces, take 
them for your own use and pretend to play with them as if you always did, 
so that you disorient your enemy—a player does not play well with the 
pieces he does not generally use. I will not cite here many other examples 
that I could.
The second rule is that the players who want to play well and to defeat 
their adversary should arrange their game in such a way that they defeat 
the enemy by force and not by error or blindly, in accord with what Vege-
158. De Ira (On anger) is a treatise in which Seneca offers advice on how to alleviate and 
to control anger.

88 BooK I
tius says in Book 3, title 18 of De re militari: “Semper autem studere debes, 
ut prior instruas aciem, quia ex arbitrio tuo potes facere quod tibi utile 
iudicas, cum nullus obsistit; deinde et tuis auges confidentiam et aduersa-
riis fiduciam minuis, quia fortiores uidentur qui prouocare non dubitant 
inimici autem incipiunt formidare, qui uident contra se acies ordinari. 
Hinc additur maximum commodum, quia tu instructus paratusque or-
dinantem et trepidum aduersarium praeoccupas.” It says the good captain 
must study first his enemy’s army so that he can do what he believes to be 
useful when nothing impedes him. This attention to detail increases his 
soldiers’ confidence and reduces the enemy’s boldness. Those who appear 
to be stronger do not hesitate to challenge and to provoke. The enemies 
begin to be fearful because they see the opposition’s organization. The 
result is an even greater advantage than your instruction and preparation 
anticipates: the fear of your enemy who is not yet organized. And you will 
be able to organize well if you observe the ways to organize that we will 
address later. He who does not know well how to compose and arrange 
this game generally loses his composure and the game. As the same Vege-
tius says in book 1, title 9: “Periculum enim ab hostibus semper grauis-
simum sustinet diuisus et inordinatus exercitus.” It says a divided and 
disorganized army always faces grave danger and harm from its enemies.
The third rule is all players should be cautious and deliberate when 
they play so that they do not fail to capitalize on any advantages. If a play-
er is careless, which we call crippled, and which serves only to embolden 
the enemy, the result is harmful to the player, who does not have any kind 
of advantage that would lead to victory. He who is not prepared is lost, 
which is why it is said well, “He who underestimates his opponent dies at 
his hands.” Cicero warns the overconfident player well in chapter 10 of his 
book about the new art of rhetoric: “Errant qui in prosperis rebus omnes 
impetus fortunae se putant fugisse; sapienter cogitant qui temporibus se-
cundis casus aduersos reformidant.”159 It says those who believe that they 
have avoided the impetuosities of fortune because they live well are mis-
taken, and those who fear adversity in prosperous times think wisely. As 
159. The “new art of rhetoric” is Cicero’s Rhetorica ad Herennium.

 BooK I                                                   89
Vegetius says in book 3, title 9: “Pauciores numero et inferiores uiribus su-
peruentus et insidias facientes sub bonis ducibus reportauerunt saepe uic-
toriam.” It says often those who have good captains, even though they are 
fewer in number and inferior in strength, achieve victory by preparing the 
ambushes and traps well. They represent the good players who fight the 
enemy by, as we say, falling on their swords. If the enemies do not act with 
discretion, but, instead, believe they can capture a pawn here or a piece 
there, without much thought, they will surely lose the advantage they had.
The fourth rule is similar to the third rule: if a player knows less than 
his adversary, he should not try to match his opponent’s skill because his 
opponent will defeat him easily. Since there is no shortage of moves, the 
player will not be able to keep up with his opponent, who will play con-
fidently and win. The player with inferior skill should not be doubtful 
because lack of confidence prevents the player from thinking clearly. A 
player whose avarice to win manifests itself in banal creativity deceives 
himself. What one player does not see with temerity, the opponent, even 
if he knows less, sees it out of necessity. As Quintus Curtius says: “ig-
nauiam quoque necessitas acuit.”160 It says necessity is the teacher.
The fifth rule is that one player does not give an advantage to the oth-
er player.161 The player who gives the advantage may believe his opponent 
makes mistakes, but it may not be the case. The player who receives the 
advantage may even play better than the one who gave him an advantage, 
defeating him more than that one time. The reason is he does not under-
stand the secret: he attributes his losses to playing badly and not to his 
opponent’s knowledge.
The sixth rule is that if an advantage is given to someone, make sure 
that it is only once or a maximum of twice if the advantage involves a 
piece. Even if there is a reason, it is not productive to give the opponent 
160. The entire sentence reads as follows: “Ut opinor, ignaviam quoque necessitas acuit 
et saepe desperatio spei causa est.” (In my opinion, necessity motivates even cowardice, and 
it is often the cause of hope and despair.) Quintus Curtius Rufus was a Roman histori-
an, whose most well-known book is Historiae Alexandri Magni (History of Alexander the 
Great).
161. An advantage is any concession that one player grants another before the game 
begins. If a player gives his opponent a material advantage, for example, he removes a pawn 
or a piece before the game begins so that his opponent will have more or stronger pieces.

90 BooK I
more advantages, because if he plays many ways and, subsequently, loses 
in many ways, he will have found some way to defend himself against his 
enemy’s attacks. By virtue of playing many games and losing them for a 
reason, he will have found a way to defend himself. It is for this reason 
that is not useful to give him more than that single advantage. Rather, 
the player should consider other concessions with respect to ways to play. 
If the player still wants to persevere in giving an advantage, however, and 
sees that he is defended against where he is usually attacked, he should 
change his strategy to avoid predictability. As Vegetius says in book 3, ti-
tle 26: “Nulla consilia meliora sunt nisi illa, quae ignorauerit aduersarius, 
antequam facias. Cum consilium tuum cognoueris aduersariis proditum, 
dispositionem mutare te conuenit.” It says there are no better plans than 
those you carry out before your opponent becomes aware of them. Once 
your plans are revealed, it is advantageous to change them, hoc est, after 
you know that your enemy understands how you generally play, so that 
you attack him another way. As Vegetius says in book 3, title 18: “Pars 
enim uictoriae est inimicum turbare, antequam dimices.” It says disrupt-
ing the enemy before the battle is an element of victory.
The seventh rule is the player tries to make sure that his opponent 
is as tired and as stressed as possible. If he finds himself in this condi-
tion, the brainpower he invests in playing will tire him, and he will make 
mistakes. Conversely, if the player’s mind is free of distractions, he will 
be able to play skillfully and to demonstrate good moves. As we stated 
above, one factor that contributes to victory is the player’s ability to con-
fuse the enemy.
The eighth rule is that whoever wants to play well and to defeat his 
enemies should attack with his people organized and united. In oth-
er words, the pawns should not be scattered on one side and the pieces 
on the other side, nor should a player separate the pawns from one an-
other, inasmuch as it is possible [to avoid doing so]. If the pieces and the 
pawns are scattered, the enemy will be able to disconcert the opponent 
with greater facility. As Vegetius says in book 3, title 15: “Magis enim ex-
pedit, ut conferti pugnent, quam longius separati; nam si nimium fuerit 
acies tenuata, cito ab aduersariis facta inpressione perrumpitur et nul-

 BooK I                                                    91
lum postea potest esse remedium.” It says a player who wants to win will 
gain an advantage if the pieces and pawns are bunched together, because 
they can help each other, as opposed to being separated from each oth-
er by distance. If the squad is too far apart, they would be quickly and 
decisively attacked by their adversaries. They would be broken apart and 
scattered, and the enemies would advance, moving between them. Con-
sequently, since the pieces and the pawns are not together, it would not 
be possible to provide reinforcements or to defend. As the same Vegetius 
says in book 3, title 26: “Qui dispersis suis inconsulte sequitur, quam ipse 
acceperat, aduersario uult dare uictoriam.” It says whoever pursues his ad-
versary with his own pieces and pawns scattered about carelessly wants to 
surrender the victory to his adversary, who has already won.
The ninth rule is a player should always endeavor to clear a path for 
his pieces, moving them to his advantage; he should not move without 
purpose or [try] to execute a surprise attack with only one piece. The ex-
ceptions to this rule are if a player can enter and exit an area safely or if 
there are other pieces that can help. If many pieces are together, as we 
just stated, they are more disposed to help each other, and more likely to 
attack and to defend successfully, than they would be if they are by them-
selves. Victory is achieved when one player exchanges some pieces for oth-
ers, which is like a person who kills the enemy while he dies as well, but 
with an advantage. This exchange is not worthy of glory. When one kills 
his enemy, however, he saves himself and his friend. It is for this reason 
that the Romans awarded an oak crown as a symbol of his strength to any 
soldier who killed the enemy in a skirmish or a battle and saved a citizen. 
According to Pliny, it was the citizen’s crown.
The tenth rule is the player should have the pawns of the king, the 
queen, the king’s bishop, and, if possible, the queen’s bishop always in 
front of the opponent’s offense. The player must arrange the pawns in this 
way as much as possible, but with prudence and preparation, as we will 
see in the chapter on ways to arrange the game. If this arrangement is not 
set up with deliberation, as advantageous as it might be to advance the 
king’s bishop’s pawn at the right moment, it would be more harmful to 
advance it at an inopportune moment. Such a move could send the game 

92 BooK I
into turmoil, because it would place the king in danger and possibly re-
sult in its capture. The other pieces may be vulnerable as well.
Since it is not possible to provide a more comprehensive explanation 
here, I direct the players to learn about this in the chapter that addresses 
the ways that we try to arrange the games. There, they will be able to learn 
when it is advantageous to advance and when it is harmful. As Macrobius 
says in book 1 of Sominum Scipionis: “Facilior ad intellectum per oculos 
via est, id quod sermo.” It says it is easier to understand when it is shown 
to us, as opposed to hearing about it without a demonstration. It is for 
this reason that the law of the Instituta in the title of Gradibus s a y s :   “ Ve r-
itas magis oculata fide, quam per aures animis hominum infigitur.”162 It 
says truth sits better with the temperament of men when seen through 
the eyes than when only heard by the ears. We could say that what we see 
is better and truer than what we only hear. With respect to this precept 
about the pawns, Damiano contradicts himself because he tells the reader 
to observe it, yet he does not include it in the games he illustrates or in-
struct those players who perhaps wanted to learn about it.
In this way, the Codex of Justinian titled De non numerata pecunia is 
in opposition to Damiano: “Nimis enem indignum est, quod sua quisque 
voce dilucide protestatus est, id in eum casum infirmare, testimonioque 
proprio resistere.”163 It says we judge as exceedingly unworthy for anyone 
to dispute what he has already acknowledged. If someone were to tell me 
that Damiano says not to observe this precept, I would respond that it is a 
gross contradiction to assert that the masters forget the general rules and 
that they are incapable of giving examples. Not even a player who has a 
one-pawn advantage and insists on attacking with that pawn in response 
to how his opponent plays is an exception to this rule, as we will discuss 
in the chapter on games.
The strategy to place the aforementioned pawns in front is under-
162. The Institutiones Justiniani is one of the four parts of Justinian’s Corpus juris civilis, 
also known as the Codex of Justinian. The other three are Digesta, the Codex Justinianus, 
and Novellae Constitutiones. Gradibus is a reference to Tractatus de gradibus cognitinum, 
which is a juridical tract on relationships.
163. De non numerata pecunia (Concerning money not actually paid) is title 30 in book 
4 of the Codex of Justinian.

 BooK I                                                    93
stood when a game is between two players of equal skill, because the nov-
ice does not realize that it behooves him to be prudent with them. Fur-
thermore, a player’s desire to have the four middle pawns as far in front 
of their other pawns and pieces is consistent with what Vegetius shows in 
book 3, title 19: “Nam circa medias parte campi ex peditibus bene armatis 
debes habere lectissimos, de quibus cuneum facias et staim aciem hosti-
um rumpas.” It says you should have the best pawns well-armed in the 
middle of the battle field, where they can form a squad and later break up 
the enemy.
The eleventh rule is the player should know not to leave the pawn 
helpless or unaccompanied. He should make sure that the pawns are 
together, so that the one in front can protect the one in back. It is un-
derstood to be the preferred arrangement whenever possible, because the 
unaccompanied pawns are extremely vulnerable and it is difficult to pro-
tect them most of the time. If the strategy to separate the pawns is not 
in order to win or to arrange the game well, as we can see, or for another 
necessity that may occur in the game, the pawns should accompany each 
other whenever possible, because, as I have said, they are able to perform 
better in the war against their enemies if positioned together. In addition, 
pawns that accompany each other are more able to assist other pawns and 
are in a better position to prevent their enemies from trying to separate 
them.
If the pawns are scattered and their pieces engaged in protecting 
them, the pawns are not in a position to help each other, as we mentioned 
earlier. If the army is spread out and divided, the enemy is more apt to 
defeat it, according to what was addressed in the eighth rule. According 
to what Vegetius shows us in book 1, title 26, addressing this purpose: 
“Et rariores atque interlucentes aditum perrumpendi hostibus praestant. 
Necesse est autem statim metu universa confundi, si intercisa acie ad 
dimicantium terga hostis accesserit.” It says the soldiers who are scattered 
provide their enemies with opportunities to confound them. Then, the 
enemies can instill fear and attack from behind.
The twelfth rule is the player should avoid separating the pawns at 
all costs, unless it were for a reason that benefits his game, such as to 

94 BooK I
make a correction, to establish order in the game, to defend a piece from 
its enemy, or for another reason that he deems necessary to benefit his 
game, as we will see in the chapter about how to arrange the pieces. In 
other instances, the pawn can be alone, depending on the course of the 
game from beginning to end. The pawns that are separated, even if they 
overwhelm the enemy as if they were two sometimes, other times can be 
an impediment to their own pieces if unaccompanied. Scattered pawns 
are disorganized, and, consequently, they are not prepared to break up 
their enemy. Instead, they can be stopped by two, three, or even one of 
the opponent’s pawns. Vegetius illustrates this scenario in book 1, title 
26: “Nihil magis prodesse constat in pugna, quam ut adsiduo exercitio 
milites in acie dispositos ordines seruent necubi contra quam expedit aut 
conglobant agmen aut laxent. Nam et constipati perdunt spatia pugnandi 
et sibi inuicem inpedimento sunt, et rariores atque interlucentes aditum 
perrumpendi hostibus praestant. Necesse est autem statim metu uniuer-
sa confundi, si intercisa acie ad dimicantium terga hostis accesserit.” It 
says there is nothing more advantageous in battle than maintaining the 
soldiers in the order that they are placed in the battle at all times, except 
where it benefits several soldiers within the squad. When the soldiers are 
heaped together, they become an impediment to each other, because they 
are not arranged in a way to fight. In addition, when the soldiers are scat-
tered, they reveal their vulnerabilities and invite the enemy to break them 
up. Then, with the army separated in the middle and the enemy poised to 
attack from behind, they are overwhelmed with fear. In title 17 of book 3, 
Vegetius says: “Si de loco suo ordinatum militem transferre coeperis, uni-
uersa turbabis.” It says if you remove the soldier from his proper place to 
another, you act with anxiety. The pawn that wreaks havoc in its path is 
emboldened, but if it changes direction, it confuses the other pawns and 
pieces as if it were removed from its place.
The thirteenth rule is the player should position the king in a safe 
place, jumping or not jumping, whenever it is convenient, so that it is as 
far away as possible from his enemy’s attacks. The king should also be in 
a place, however, where its pieces can defend readily and advance on the 
enemy. Furthermore, the player should reinforce the area the king occu-

 BooK I                                                    95
pies with his pawns and pieces, because the king’s fortune or misfortune 
determines the outcome of the game.
It is advantageous that all of the pieces be in place, therefore, to de-
fend the king. In addition, there should be as many pieces as possible 
around the king, or, at least, pieces that are prepared to help him quickly 
at all times. Do what Vegetius advises in title 17 of book 3: “In subsidiis 
conloces plurimos.” It says a player should place many pieces in a location 
that is conducive to providing help. With respect to the kings of Persia, 
where this game originated—if Xerxes was its inventor, which many peo-
ple believe, as we have talked about before—they always had with them 
ten thousand knights to defend them. The knights were called the “im-
mortals,” not because they did not die, but rather because when several 
died, there were others at the ready to take their place. In this way, the 
king’s protection was never lacking, according to what Quintus Curtius 
writes.
The fourteenth rule is the player should not move the pawns from 
their own squares in front of the transposed king unless it were neces-
sary to give the king a way out, to move away from a piece or a pawn that 
could do it harm, to make a move that the player believes will benefit 
his game and result in little harm, or to advance the game in other ways. 
These moves should occur at the most auspicious time possible, such as 
providing support for the pieces that the pawns exposed to danger, as ex-
plained in the previous rule. It should be known that I define the king’s 
transposition as that part of the board where the king is fortified either 
from his own side or the queen’s side. If the king’s transposition does not 
produce this result, however, or, in other words, if the king is able to move 
to a more advantageous square, I do not define this move as the king’s 
transposition because such a move could lead a player to move the pawns 
from their own squares when it is not necessary.
The fifteenth rule is that before the king transposes himself by leaping 
to his knight’s second square or the queen’s bishop’s square, or in between 
those two squares, which occurs frequently in order to move as far away 
as possible from the opposing attacks, and before the queens are captured 
with or without other pieces, if the conditions of the game do not favor 

96 BooK I
transposition, do not transpose or search for refuge, because the king 
could find itself distanced from the other pieces and pawns, which would 
result in the loss of many chances to be able to join and to help them. 
Consequently, the player would often lose the game. The player should 
try to place the king near the pawns, where it can be more disposed to 
receive aid from its own pieces, as well as position itself in the safest place 
possible. I want the player to know that the king is one of the game’s most 
important pieces to favor and to help. It is advantageous to know how to 
move the king, as we explained in the chapter about the king, because it 
can move to many sides and through all of the squares, frontward and 
backward, more than any other piece except the queen. With respect to 
this advice, do what Vegetius says: “In subsidiis conloces plurimos.”164 It 
says the captain must always be ready and attentive to help others.
The sixteenth rule is the player should never surrender a piece for two 
pawns, even if it appears to be a good move, and not even for three pawns 
unless it could not be helped or is absolutely necessary for the benefit of 
the game. Also, the player would be justified [in doing so were it in order] 
to place the enemy in a predicament where there is a certainty of winning 
the game or improving his game if it is not going well. Consider the pre-
dicament well, make sure the risk is not in vain; for the game could be lost 
if the opponent’s pieces were arranged for it. In studying all aspects well, 
I do not think the player should surrender two pawns, but rather one is 
appropriate, even to lose it for nothing if it means to weaken the enemy in 
order to win the game. Otherwise, generally a knight or a bishop captures 
two or three pawns, in part because one or the other captures them when 
they stop the pawns’ movement. The king wins moves because his pieces 
always play, and the pawns cannot always play, which the disposition of 
the game will show.
The seventeenth rule might appear contrary to the preceding one but 
not if the game were contested as it is usually played in Italy, where the 
bare king and a stalemate result in a game that would end in a draw.165 
164. De re militari, book 3, title 17.
165. A bare king (robado) is the name for the king when it is the only piece left on the 
board. In Italy, if either player had a bare king, the game ended in a draw. In Spain, however, 

 BooK I                                                    97
For example: If, with a knight and two pawns, or a bishop and two pawns, 
and an opponent who has the same pieces, you see that the game requires 
a skillful strategy, try to surrender the knight or the bishop for the op-
ponent’s two pawns. This way, you win two pawns and possibly avoid a 
stalemate. If you capture only one pawn in exchange for the knight or 
the bishop, however, the game may end in a draw, which is better than a 
loss. This strategy would work well if the player were to win the game by 
checkmate, because, otherwise, a player would not surrender a piece for 
two pawns. The piece by itself, unless it is the queen or rook, cannot give 
checkmate. If the player were to take only one pawn, however, he could 
lose the game because the opponent would capture the pawns with his 
piece, or whichever pawn were opposite his pawn. In possession of the 
piece, he would impede the other pawn’s path and, in this way, the other 
pawn would become a queen and give checkmate.
The eighteenth rule is if the player has a rook, a knight, and two 
pawns, and his opponent has the same pieces and number of pawns, the 
player should try to take the two pawns with the knight because he could 
win the game by giving checkmate. The game can be won in this way, 
but whenever the player is unable to win the game and, in addition, finds 
himself in need of help, the game could become tricky, because, as we will 
discuss, a knight and a rook cannot win the game against a rook if the 
player who has the rook knows how to play. What is said in these two 
rules is not contrary to the rules that precede them, because their strate-
gy is necessary for the player who tries not to lose, but, instead, ventures 
to win. These moves should be executed at the most propitious time and 
depends on the position of the king, because the king could find itself 
enclosed in a place where these moves might not be advantageous.
The nineteenth rule is all players should know that a rook and a 
knight alone cannot win a game against only a rook according to how 
the game is played in Italy, Spain, or elsewhere. I am not saying only that 
the game cannot be won by checkmate, but it also cannot be won by bare 
the player left with a bare king was declared the loser of the game. Since the game did not 
end in a checkmate, the winner received only half of what he would have earned if he had 
won the game by checkmate.

98 BooK I
king or stalemate when the player who has the rook knows how to play. 
The player should make sure to move the king as much as possible to the 
middle of the board, attacking the opponent’s king with checks, and if the 
opponent’s king conceals itself with its knight, the player should keep the 
king there [in the middle of the board] in a way that the opponent can-
not use either the knight or the king. When the opponent’s king emerges 
from its protection, the player’s king should attack with checks in any way 
possible. The player should utilize the king, however, with discretion and 
wisely, keeping in mind not to allow the king to be cornered, not to lose 
the rook carelessly, and not to permit the opponent to conceal his king 
with the rook. The game would end in a draw [if the rook were captured], 
because the knight cannot give checkmate by itself. If the game were 
played in Italy, neither player would win anything; if the game were played 
in Spain, the player who stalemated the other player would be entitled to 
half of what he would have received if he had won. Since the way in which 
chess is played in Italy does not permit the knight to give checkmate, the 
player would not have won anything, but the way in which chess is played 
in Spain would result in winning half of what is at stake.
The twentieth rule is all players should know that in no way can a 
rook alone win the game against a knight, unless it involves chicanery 
or if the knight’s player were so ignorant that he allowed himself to be 
on a side of the board where the rook could capture the knight if the 
rook’s player were trying to win. If he knows how to play well and tries 
not to place his king on the last ranks, where there would be danger, he 
isolates the enemy’s king with checks and does not allow the knight to be 
far away, where he cannot be helped by the king, lest the opposing player 
stop the movement and win with Spain’s bare king and Italy’s checkmate 
with the rook. In Italy, even if the opposing king is left alone, checkmate 
is given.
The twenty-first rule is the player should know that a rook and a bish-
op can defeat a rook if the game were played in Spain [i.e., bare king] and 
there were no more pieces on the board. If the game were played in Ita-
ly, the game would end in checkmate. Both results would be much more 
difficult, however, if the player who had the rook knew how to play. The 

 BooK I                                                   99
easiest way to avoid checkmate is by placing the opponent in a position 
to surrender his rook. If checkmate is not given this way, it is because the 
player knows how to defend against it or to play for a stalemate when he 
feels trapped and afflicted, to the extent that the player is not able to give 
checkmate with the rook from where it is captured. [In this case,] the op-
ponent takes the rook, ending the game in a stalemate. If the player does 
not know how to play well, he will find himself in checkmate; if he knows 
how to defend, it will be difficult to give him checkmate, given these cir-
cumstances; and it has happened to me, I gave checkmate to reasonable 
players, who have defended well. Finally, if the rook’s player knows how 
to defend well, and the opponent is not a good player, the latter will not 
give checkmate to the former, unless the rook’s player makes a mistake 
with great weariness.
The twenty-second rule is a rook will win a game by capturing a bish-
op, without anything more than Spain’s bare king, but it will not win 
according to Italy’s checkmate. The player whose rook defeats a bishop 
is astute, because he is able to avoid checkmate. If the bishop’s player 
wants to place the king on one of the last ranks, he should try to put it 
on one of the rook’s squares, where the bishop can protect the king from 
the knight’s square in this way: if the player has the white pieces and the 
king’s bishop, he should place the king on his rank in the queen’s rook’s 
square so that the bishop, in the knight’s square, can prevent the oppo-
nent’s rook from placing the king in check. The opponent’s king cannot 
defend against the king’s exit from the rook’s square, so it would be a 
stalemate, and nothing is gained with a stalemate. The king, remaining 
where it is, moves with the bishop, or it stays with the bishop, moving 
to the rook’s and pawn’s two squares. If the king, with the same bish-
op, were on the same file as the opponent’s king, the player should try to 
place the king on the king’s rook’s square so that the bishop can take the 
knight’s square.
If the bishop were a black piece, place the king on his rank in the 
rook’s square and on the queen’s rook’s square, if on the other side, so 
that the bishop can cover the king on the knights’ squares. This way, all 
that could happen would be a stalemate. This result is useful because 

100 BooK I
nothing is lost if the game were played the way it is in Italy. Do the same 
with the black pieces, changing the squares so that whichever bishop the 
player has can cover the king from the knight’s square, regardless of the 
rank. In this way, the bishop is a part of the king, and it is not possible to 
divert the king without noticing the bishop.
The twenty-third rule is a player who has a pawn and a king cannot 
promote the pawn to a queen. Furthermore, the pawn and the king can-
not give checkmate if the defense of the opponent’s king is in front of it, 
on its third rank, where it compels the other player to execute a move he 
does not want to make. Always try to keep this rule: if your opponent 
moves the pawn around, trying to attack from behind it, place the de-
fender in front of the pawn, on the third square. In this way, it is not pos-
sible to make a queen according to how chess is played in Italy or to give 
checkmate, since it will be a stalemate according to how chess is played in 
Spain, and only one-half would be won. This rule and the preceding one 
illustrate what Vegetius shows us about the military in title 26: “Amplius 
prodest locus saepe quam uirtus.”166 It means that location is often more 
advantageous in war than virtue. In this way, positioning converts the 
weaker into the stronger, and it is able to defend itself from the enemy, 
regardless of how strong the enemy is.
The twenty-fourth rule is the player should notice if the opponent, 
according to how the game is arranged, is left with a free pawn on one of 
the rook’s last ranks and a bishop that cannot attack on the rook’s square, 
on whose file the pawn advances to become a queen. The game will be a 
stalemate according to how chess is played in Spain, and by Spain is also 
to be understood Portugal. In some places, stalemate is a cause of dis-
crepancy among some players. According to how chess is played in Italy, 
neither player benefits from a stalemate, which is generally the result of 
shrewdness. If the opponent could take the front rank and appropriate 
the defense’s position and the rook’s square, where the bishop cannot at-
tack, and plays on it, as well as on the squares of the rook’s or the knight’s 
pawn, without leaving those squares, it will not be possible to make the 
pawn a queen, and the result will be a stalemate, not a checkmate.
166. De re miliari, book 3, title 26.

 BooK I                                                   101
The twenty-fifth rule is the player should keep in mind that if he has 
only a pawn, which he advances to the last square before it could be made 
a queen, and his enemy has the last queen, the game would end in a bare 
king according to how it is played in Spain, provided that each player’s 
king is not within proximity of the other’s. Otherwise, it is possible that 
enemy would not impede the player from acquiring a queen, and the re-
sult would be checkmate.
If the pawn were two squares away from being a queen, and the ene-
my has his king or queen in front of the pawn so that it cannot advance, 
checkmate is not possible if the pawn advances in the knight’s or rook’s 
file, because the queen’s position obligates the pawn to move one square 
or two squares from the king. It is for this reason that whenever the en-
emy tries to direct the other player’s pawn to a square in the rook’s file, 
the other player moves away from it. Then, the enemy tries to position 
the queen to draw the other player’s pawn to the rook’s file by moving the 
king diagonally and not straight. This way, the enemy, if he is not careless, 
can force the other player to move the pawn to the rook’s file.
If the pawn is on one of the other files, however, and the king or queen 
is in front of it, the player will move [the pawn] forcefully to wherever it 
can give checkmate. It must be noted that according to the way chess is 
played in Italy, the pawn can give checkmate, because the king cannot pro-
tect the queen from being captured by the pawn, or [because] the pawn 
can draw the queen closer until the king also moves nearer the pawn, 
where the pawn can give checkmate. Since checkmate cannot be given in 
the last ranks and the pawn cannot be captured, the result is a stalemate, 
as long as the player knows how to move the pawn to the rook’s square.
The twenty-sixth rule is the player should know that some players 
consider a game to begin without an advantage to either player if one 
player is allowed to begin with his king in the rook’s square in exchange 
for giving his opponent the rook’s pawn and the right to move first.167 
167. The Spanish word for the expression “another move” is mano (hand), and it is a 
reference to which player makes the first move. In order to determine which player begins 
the game, the younger of the two players holds a white pawn in one hand and the black 
pawn in the other hand. The other player, who does not know which color is in which hand, 
chooses the color black or white and then chooses a hand. If the color of the pawn in the 

102 BooK I
I inform the player of my advice: that he choose the pawn and the first 
move instead of the king in the corner, because, without the move and 
the pawn, he is not capable of much offense; furthermore, the pawn is for-
midable. It is always advantageous to remove the enemy’s weapons, and as 
they say with respect to the number of enemies, the fewest possible.
The twenty-seventh rule is whoever tries to learn this game should 
know that players generally have a king’s pawn and two moves or the 
king in the corner and two moves, but the player who offers the one or 
the other cannot jump. A player may also be given a knight in lieu of the 
aforementioned to have an equal game. My advice to the player: Take first 
the best piece, for, if the player knows how to play and to defend against 
the aforementioned positioning, the piece’s side will always be prepared 
to achieve victory because it has the advantage and the enemy less so. 
The player should also know well how to defend against these positions, 
applying the moves that he will see, which deal with a knight against a 
pawn and the way to defend himself against a king in the corner. If he 
is not versed in the ways of positioning his pieces, regardless whether he 
begins the game without an advantage or with an advantage, the enemy 
will always confuse him with his positioning and cause him to make mis-
takes, which we will see later in a rule about it.
The twenty-eighth rule is the player should also know that players, 
in general, agree that giving a piece to the other player is equivalent to a 
concession, in which the player who begins the game with one less piece is 
able to place the king in the corner with its pawn and have two successive 
moves. My advice to him who knows little and who is not versed in posi-
tioning: he should accept the piece that his opponent gives him, because 
he is apt to make more mistakes, and he can do so in a less harmful way if 
his opponent has one less piece. Since he who knows less does not know 
how to attack or to be daring, it behooves him to accept a piece from his 
opponent, because he will lose if he chooses to begin the game with his 
king in the corner.
If the player is versed in those moves, however, he should know that 
younger player’s chosen hand matches the color the older player chooses, the older player 
would make the first move.

 BooK I                                                  103
it is better to choose to begin the game with the king in the corner with 
its pawn and the two successive moves, because his adversary is prepared 
for any offense. The player should never underestimate the situation, no 
matter how advantageous it appears to be; he should not, as they say, hold 
anything back. If the game had two players of equal ability, I would al-
ways give the knight for the two aforementioned pieces, as long as it is a 
balanced game, more or less. As they say, whatever happens, happens, but 
the best course of action is to be relentless against the enemy.
The twenty-ninth rule is the player should know that the king’s pawn, 
a knight, and a move are generally considered to be a fair exchange for a 
rook. I would always choose the rook, and I would advise other players to 
do the same, especially if the player knows how to prepare for the pawn’s 
offense, which is appreciated in a game of skilled players. The rook is a 
great piece. As they say, it is always in the right place at the right time, 
and even more so when the game begins to clear out.
The thirtieth rule is, if the knight were exchanged for the king’s pawn 
and two moves, or the king in the corner and two moves (in either case, 
the second of the two moves provides the player with more offense), I ad-
vise the player to take the knight first and then the king’s pawn and the 
two moves, or to take the king in the corner and the two moves, before 
the rook. In this offense, all of the pieces are better prepared to attack the 
enemy more freely; the enemy’s pieces are reduced to captives.
The thirty-first rule is all players should know that it is not uncom-
mon for one player who seeks to acquire an advantage before the game 
begins to offer to exchange one of his knights for one of his opponent’s 
rooks. There are ignorant players who grant the request, thinking that 
it is unimportant. They believe that the knight is more valuable than 
the rook. I want them to know that it is not a wise calculation, howev-
er, because the player who exchanges his knight for his opponent’s rook 
benefits more than had he exchanged his knight for his opponent’s king’s 
pawn and an extra move. For some players, this latter exchange could be 
even less advantageous than receiving a rook, because they may not know 
how to utilize the king’s pawn and an extra move effectively.
The thirty-second rule is a player should know that many players usu-

104 BooK I
ally exchange a queen-knight, or a queen that is able to move as a knight 
on the board, for a knight.168 The player believes he can make this ex-
change as he exchanges any other piece and still maintain the advantage. 
He deceives himself. Since the queen is able to move more effectively than 
any of the other pieces, if the queen also has the knight’s jump, it is very 
difficult to defend, because there is no cover to the knight’s check and the 
queen can occupy all of the areas by its virtues. Consequently, the queen 
can give checkmate by herself even if the opponent is well accompanied. 
It is for this reason that a player must be careful not to give up the queen 
unless it were for a rook. Otherwise, the player may lose a piece in the ex-
change. The player who does not have the queen is at a disadvantage until 
he is able to exchange one of his pieces for the queen.
The thirty-third rule is the player should endeavor throughout the 
game not to forfeit the bishop that attacks the opponent’s king, because 
the bishop always pesters the enemy. If the bishop is captured, the player 
should lose it at a point in the game that favors him. If the timing is not 
beneficial to the player, however, and necessity requires something else, 
it is better to be prepared for immediate harm than to wait for an ad-
vantageous time in the future that may never materialize. We will leave 
it until the chapter that addresses the bishop and the knight to discuss 
the differences, including which piece is more advantageous, between the 
bishop and the knight.
The thirty-fourth rule is the player who has an advantage over his op-
ponent, even a small one with which he can reasonably win the game, 
168. The earliest reference to the queen-knight (dama cavallota) is Francesch Vicent’s 
Libre dels jochs partits dels schachs en nombre de 100 (1495; The Book of 100 Chess Problems). It 
is not a coincidence that the queen became one of the strongest pieces on the board shortly 
after the Isabella’s coronation as queen of Spain in 1492. In 1474, following the death of 
her brother King Henry II, she proclaimed herself queen of Castile in a ceremony in Sego-
via that foreshadowed the authority she would exercise as queen of Spain: “The procession 
from the church offered a splendid spectacle to the townspeople. Isabella rode on horse-
back, while the nobles and dignitaries surrounded her and marched behind. At the very 
head of the procession rode a horseman carrying a naked sword with the point downward, 
resembling a cross. Isabella chose to revive this ancient symbol of militant faith and justice, 
although the traditional monarch’s symbol in Castile was a scepter. The sword recalled not 
only the royal conquerors who had wrested Spain from the Moors, but also the feats of the 
warrior maid Joan of Arc, earlier in the century” (Yalom, Birth of the Chess Queen, 233–34).

 BooK I                                                  105
should exchange his pieces and pawns with caution. Often, a player loses 
because of disorder, even if the player has an advantage. It is for this rea-
son the player should be alert when he exchanges pieces with the oppo-
nent. If the player is distracted and, consequently, unable to think clearly, 
he may find himself in danger. As we declared in the third rule, the sol-
diers who, under the leadership of good captains, prepare ambushes and 
attacks against their enemies defeat the soldiers who are not as prepared.
The thirty-fifth rule is a player should know not to make an error 
called blindness. This mistake occurs when the player makes a move but 
does not consider its consequences. Instead of thinking three or four 
moves ahead, imagining the future advantages and disadvantages, the 
player makes many moves, little by little. All players should heed my 
warning by playing in a relaxed and deliberate manner. Cassiodorus says 
in book 1, chapter 17: “Omnia subita probantur incauta.”169 It says all 
things carried out suddenly prove to be done so haphazardly. Seneca says 
in book 5, chapter 11: “Nihil autem ordinatum est quod praecipitatum 
et properat.”170 It says nothing that is hurried or precipitated is well ar-
ranged. The same Seneca says in book 7, chapter 7: “Mora omnis odio 
est, sed sapientem facit.”171 It says all delay is hateful, but its usefulness 
is that it breeds wisdom. I could relate many other examples about this 
subject, but, in order to abbreviate, I will not cite them, because chess is 
a game. It is intended for recreation and not the despair and death of the 
person with whom we play or those who watch, which has happened to 
me many times when I played with players, who, in each move they had 
to play, required a quarter of an hour. As a result, it is possible to play 
only two, or three, at the most, games. Even though it was advantageous, 
I could not tolerate it, and those who came to watch could not wait. It is 
beneficial to have a way in which the game is not so precipitate that there 
is no consideration given to what is being played, nor so slow that it be-
169. Cassiodorus, Varia epistolae, 1 . 17.
170. Seneca, Epistulae morales, book 4, letter 40.2.
171. This sententia, while attributed to Seneca, originated with Publilius Syrus (85–43 
b.c.), who is well known for his collection of moral sayings. Seneca also cites Syrus’s senten-
tiae in two of his Moral Letters to Lucilius (“On the Philosopher’s Seclusion” and “On the 
Value of Advice”).

106 BooK I
comes intolerable, to the point that the pleasure of such a beautiful game 
becomes hateful. As Cassiodorus says book 3, chapter 40: “Nec possumus 
aestimare iucundum, quod ingrata fuerit dilatione suspensum.”172 It says 
we cannot appreciate or judge as pleasurable that which we admire with 
ungrateful delight. Cicero says in book 6 of the Philippics: “Exspectatio 
quidem quantum adferat languoris animis quis non videt?” It says, who 
cannot see or understand how much anxiety waiting incites? Many other 
examples I could bring.
In order for a player to call himself genteel and polished with respect 
to knowing how to play, he should be liberal, but not so much that he is 
inconsiderate, slow, or bothersome. The player is able to be liberal when 
the opponent is considerate of his own moves and plays them without 
delay. If the players contemplate the moves that will benefit each of them, 
all will be well. As Tullius says in the first book, chapter 34 of De offi-
ciis: “In omnibus negotiis prius quam adgrediare, adhibenda est praep-
aratio diligens.”173 It says before you begin to get involved in any busi-
ness, it is necessary to prepare diligently. It is evident that there is a need 
to know what can be harmful, which Seneca acknowledges in book 17, 
chapter 3: “Quodcumque laesurum est multo ante quam accidat, specu-
lare et averte.”174 It says to take notice, to ponder, and to avoid everything 
that can be deleterious long before it happens. In this way, as I say, it is 
advantageous to consider not only how the opponent’s every move can at-
tack, but also to scrutinize the subsequent moves in order to be prepared 
to correct them and to harm the enemy. This explanation is sufficient to 
illustrate this rule.
The thirty-sixth rule is a player should be trained and proficient in 
all of the ways of playing that we present. This rule applies as much to 
a game that begins equally as to a game in which there is an advantage, 
and it applies because the offensive and defensive moves in one game may 
be profitable for the moves in the other game. In this way, the player will 
know how to attack and to capture the enemy unnoticed and how to de-
172. Cassiodorus, Variarum libri, 3.40.
173. Cicero, De officiis, 1.34.73.
174 .   Epistulae Morales (Book 16, Letter 98.2)

 BooK I                                                  107
fend against the enemy’s attacks. If the player is not trained before he en-
ters the battle, the result will be what Cassiodorus says in book 1, chapter 
39 of his epistles: “Ars bellandi, si non praeluditur, quum fuerit necessaria 
non habetur.” It says when the art of fighting is not learned first as in a 
game, it will not be present when it is needed. It is for this reason, as the 
same author says in the same place: “Discat miles in otio quod perficere 
possit in bello.” It says the soldier should learn in his leisure time what-
ever he will need to do perfectly in the ambush or the fight. The same, in 
chapter 16: “Res praeliorum bene disponitur, quoties in pace tractatur.” It 
says successful preparation for the fight takes place when practiced during 
times of peace. Many other authorities and examples I could bring to this 
subject, but I will not, in order to abbreviate. In this way, I conclude these 
general rules and warnings.
There are other rules called “laws of the game,” which the player 
needs to know. No player should compete if ignorant of the rules; a player 
will not be able to cite ignorance of a rule as the reason he lost the game. 
Even if the player were to plead ignorance, the other players and judges 
will not tolerate this defense, because each player is subject to the game’s 
laws and conditions and not his own whims. If not, as Horace says, do 
not play: “Ludere qui nescit campestribus abstinet armis, indoctusque .
 . . 
quiescit.”175 It says whoever does not know the laws of the game should 
not play, and he who does not know should not pretend to know. Valeri-
us Maximus alludes to this axiom in book 7 of Sapienter dicta aut facta: 
“Scipio Aphricanus turpe esse aiebat in re militari dicere ‘non putaram,’ 
videlicet quia explorato et excusso consilio quae ferro aguntur adminis-
trari oportere arbitrabatur summa ratione: inemendabilis est enim error, 
qui violentiae Martis comittitur.” It says Scipio Africanus used to say 
that clumsy things in the military did not weigh on him, because what 
he judged worthy of correction and firm advice was a mishap, regardless 
of how large or small the error, with weapons that takes place during a 
war. It is advantageous for any person who wants to play this game to be 
instructed in its laws. Consequently, all of the laws, or all that can occur, 
175. Horace, Epistles, 2.3, lines 379–80.

108 BooK I
are explained here. With respect to the laws that are not addressed here, 
as well as the laws that are discussed, I defer to the judgment of the most 
excellent players, not just those who are experts in the game, but the play-
ers who are also wise and reasonable.
The first rule is one player may assess a penalty to the other player if 
the latter is deceptive. The player who is able to assess the penalty may 
choose to deem the move permissible and not penalize the opponent, or 
the play may require the opponent to replay the move. This rule is val-
id only when the player who decides the penalty has not made a move 
yet. If the player makes a move, however, it is understood that he accepts 
the opponent’s move and, therefore, loses the privilege to assess a penalty. 
Similarly, if the player who makes the illegal move realizes that it is not 
permitted, he may ask to play it again even if the other player does not see 
it. The players should observe this rule in order to eliminate excuses and 
debates.
The second rule is the result of a mistake or malice, depending on 
which one is better for the player’s game. If a player sees that the oppo-
nent is inattentive, he can remove from the board one of his own pieces 
or pawns in order to win a move in a game that he considers to be advan-
tageous to his opponent; such a move would be considered, of course, to 
be deceptive. If the opponent notices the deception, he can ask the oth-
er player to move again; if he wants to pretend that he did not see it, he 
may. It is quite uncommon for a player to take his own pieces. When it 
does occur, the player explains that it is due to an error and not to malice. 
The player may inform the opponent that he did something he should 
not have done before the opponent’s next move. Then, the player returns 
the piece or pawn to its previous square and makes another move. If the 
irregularity were not noticed before the next move, however, it could be 
considered malice, but only if the player has the proper amount of time to 
move the piece he touched first or to move another piece.
The third rule is a player is obligated to move the piece that he touch-
es, unless contact is due to straightening or rearranging the piece for the 
opponent, or something similar and without delay. If time passes after 
the player touches the piece, the delay may be interpreted as the player’s 

 BooK I                                                  109
desire to play the piece and an acknowledgment of regret that it does not 
seem to be correct. Consequently, he plays the piece.
The fourth rule is if a player captures an opponent’s piece or a pawn 
via an invalid move, it is important to know which player moved first. 
If the player who executed the illegal capture moved first, he should re-
play the piece. The player is obligated, however, to take the opponent’s 
piece however possible to remedy the earlier infraction and to promote 
fair play. If the player wants to take the opponent’s piece or a pawn with a 
piece that is not valid, the move is deemed malicious and deceptive. If the 
player is not able to capture the opponent’s piece, he is free to make any 
move he wants.
The fifth rule is if a player protects the king with a piece or a pawn 
and then decides to move the piece or the pawn, but the move is a false 
calculation because it exposes the king to check, the opponent can choose 
to allow the piece or the pawn to move. If the opponent chooses not to 
allow the piece or the pawn to move, the player can move the king. Since 
the defect is not with the piece that exposed the king to check, but with 
the king, the king is obligated to accept the consequences, and these 
words are my opinion on the matter.
The sixth rule is the player who places the opponent in check should 
inform the opponent of the check and name it. If the player does not in-
form the opponent before the player’s next move, the opponent cannot 
make him stop, unless the piece with which the player gives the oppo-
nent check were played again on another square and the player names the 
check. The opponent’s king remains on its square, which is the reason the 
piece was able to move. In this case, the opponent is obligated to escape 
check, except if he is unable to protect the king or to take the piece that 
gives him check. Be it known, however, the king can move as if nothing 
impeded him until check is given again.
The seventh rule is the players should keep in mind that each time 
one player grants an advantage of one piece to another player, or any oth-
er advantage, the player who provides the advantage will make the game’s 
opening move. This rule is valid only if the opponent does not object. It 
is favorable to both players that all aspects of this game are transparent.

110 BooK I
The eighth rule is relevant if a player grants the following advantage 
to his opponent: to give checkmate only with a pawn or two pawns. In 
order to avoid any malice, the player who offers to give checkmate is 
compelled to give checkmate with the pawn and prohibited from giving 
check with the pawn and checkmate with another piece. If the player has 
two pawns, he will give check with one immediately; later, he will give 
checkmate with the other pawn. Any other way, the player has not ful-
filled his commitment.
The ninth rule is if one of the players gives his opponent a transposed 
king, or, as they say, a king at the corner, as an advantage, the opponent 
is free to jump with his king unless it is in a place where it cannot jump. 
The purpose of the qualification is to avoid debate and to be transparent.
The tenth rule is the pawn cannot avoid the battle unless the oppo-
nent gives consent. If the player wants to capture the pawn, he can take 
it one square back or let it pass. In this way, the pawn still participates in 
the battle, but its status depends on the adversary. In other words, the 
adversary can decide whether to capture it or not. It is believed that the 
game is played this way in Italy. In Spain and Portugal, where the best 
players blossomed and continue to blossom, the pawn can be used in this 
way. The chapter in which we discuss the pawns addresses their strategic 
importance, which includes the aforementioned rule.
The eleventh rule is that two moves cannot be played at the same 
time, for example, if the player moves the rook and the king, which also 
leaps, at the same time, or if the player moves a pawn and places the king 
in the pawn’s square, which is done in Italy. This manner of playing must 
be prohibited, because it is a bad way to play. Furthermore, there is not 
a single good player from the past who played in this way. A player was 
never permitted, and never should be permitted, to make two moves at 
the same time before the opponent makes one move. This way of playing, 
it is said, is allowed only in some parts of Italy; with respect to the rest 
of Italy, it was never and currently is not allowed. Even Damiano, who 
composed the short Italian book about this game, condemned it. Bad 
customs should not be enforced but eliminated, because as Cassiodorus 
says in the third book, chapter 7 of the epistles: “Non sit novitas molesta, 

 BooK I                                                    111
quae proba est.” It says novelty, if it is good, is not bothersome. Monten-
aro Paduano in chapter 82 of De luna cleri says: “Auget non minuit, mala 
consuetudo reatum.”176 It means bad customs do not diminish before 
guilt and crime increase. As Cassiodorus says in book 8, chapter 20 of the 
epistles: “Bonum insolitum plus amatur.” It means that which is good is 
more loved because it is not common.
The twelfth rule is if one player pledges to identify the square where 
he gives his opponent checkmate, both players should agree to this rule 
in order to avoid debates and disputes. If it were not said clearly, the in-
tegrity of the game may be compromised, because if a player does not in-
form the opponent that he gave checkmate in the middle of the board or 
on the king’s fourth square, the silence may be interpreted as malicious 
or feigned ignorance. The player who gives checkmate should identify 
the square from which he gives checkmate; the king will be close to the 
square or far from it. If the player gives checkmate in another square, the 
player loses because the king is either in the indicated square or he is not. 
This consequence is a rule and an attribute of the game.177
Many people have misunderstood how to identify the square from 
which the player gives checkmate until now. If the player gives checkmate 
to the opposing king from this square or that square, or the player will 
give it, as illustrated by the games that have been written about and stud-
ied, the piece that gives the king checkmate or will give him checkmate 
is on the square and not the king. In other words, the player informs the 
opponent that he gives checkmate from this square.
The thirteenth rule is a player who informs the opponent that he will 
give check and checkmate with a pawn should capitalize on the first op-
portunity to do so. If the player promises to give check and checkmate 
with a specific pawn, saying, “I offer to give check and checkmate with 
this pawn,” he is obligated to give checkmate with the pawn that he spec-
ified and declared in the agreement with the other player as long as it re-
176. Montenaro of Padua was a thirteenth-century Italian poet.
177. Today, players are not required to inform the opponent of check or checkmate. If 
a player mistakenly identifies check or checkmate, the game continues without any penalty. 
In tournament chess, however, the arbiter may assess the player a penalty if he or she believes 
the player misidentified check or checkmate on purpose.

112 BooK I
mains a pawn. If the player were to make the pawn a queen, however, as 
much as it changes the dignity, power, traits, and nature that the pawn 
had before, it does not satisfy the conditions of the agreement. If the play-
er identifies the piece but does not qualify its function, saying, “I propose 
to give checkmate with this piece,” he will have satisfied the conditions of 
the promise, unless the lawyers and canonists say the contrary, if he gives 
checkmate with the pawn or after the pawn becomes a queen. It seems to 
me that this rule should be implemented and maintained, unless there is 
a better one, as the law of the game, in order to avoid disputes.
The fourteenth rule is all players should know that when a neutral 
piece, so named because it escapes capture while the player moves it all 
over the board, is played, it is also called a crazy or free piece because it 
can do whatever it wants without penalty.178 In other words, the oppo-
nent is unable to capture it.
The fifteenth rule is the player should know that the neutral pawn can 
be captured when it becomes a queen if it is not played as a pawn. When 
the pawn becomes a queen, and the player moves the piece as a queen 
moves, it is no longer possible to say that the player captures the pawn, 
but rather the queen. It is beneficial to inform the other player of this 
move to avoid accusations of deception. It is useful for the person who 
wants to learn how to play this game, as I have said, to know its rules.
The sixteenth rule is if a player believes he cannot win a game, the 
game ends at fifty moves, which includes the total number of moves by 
each player. The player who expects to win the game may implement this 
rule if the outcome is a foregone conclusion. A player who has fifty moves 
is able to try all of the possible ways to win a game. A game is considered 
178. López describes this piece as a “pieza atreguada,” which Spanish chess historian 
Antonio Gude defines as “a piece that could not be captured . . . the piece moved wildly all 
over the board . . . it was synonymous with ‘crazy’ in the sixteenth century” (una pieza que 
no se podia capturar .
 . . l
a pieza iba y venía por el tablero locamente .
 . . e
n el siglo X VI fue 
sin
ónimo de loco). Antonio Gude, “Pieza atreguada,” Antonio Gude [blog], September 12, 
2011, https://antoniogude.com/pieza-atreguada/ (translation mine). The term “neutral” re-
fers to the mental condition of a person whose insanity also includes moments of lucidity, as 
Covarrubias notes: “Neutral. The insane person who is able to find respite from the illness 
and return to his or her right mind.” (Atreguado. El loco que tiene treguas con su enferme-
dad y vuelve a tiempos en su juyzio.) Sebastián de Covarrubias Orozco, Tesoro de la lengua 
castellana, o española (Madrid: Melchor Sánchez, 1674), s.v. Atreguado (translation mine).

 BooK I                                                   113
not winnable if one player does not win after fifty moves, if it is not evi-
dent to a good player how to win the game, or if neither player can find a 
way to win.
The seventeenth rule is, regardless of the number of times our ances-
tors played in Bélmez “occupied square,” “touched piece,” and “shadowed 
square,” all of which are proper ways of playing, we do not feel it is fair 
in genteel things to degenerate from what is old and good.179 Since we 
do not want to develop a game based on bad habits, we worked to restore 
everything else that we could, in order to retain the elegance and courte-
sy of the game. Consequently, from this day forward, if a player touches 
a piece, he must play it. In addition, if a player touches a square with a 
piece, the piece must remain there because good players who touch the 
square, remain there. In other words, they do not remove their hand from 
the piece, which is an ugly and disrespectful gesture. With respect to 
this rule, it seems to me that the person who contradicts it should not be 
heard, but I defer everything to the judgment of wise people. I say what 
I believe to be correct and decent. With these words, I conclude these 
precepts, pleading that all of the good players make other players observe 
them, as well as those people who will learn to play the game from this 
day forward. May they learn these rules, as well as the many ways good 
players know how to play.
Of course, now that we know the aforementioned rules, it is appro-
priate to describe the different ways to begin to play, to compose, and to 
arrange the game. Each player who studies them will learn how to play 
the game of chess, how to attack the enemy, and how to defend against 
the opponent’s attacks. While I did not include all of the information 
that I could have, because it would be a never-ending list, I did include 
the most valuable information, including the most effective strategies. 
I will make brief mention of strategies that are not successful. Further-
more, I invite any person to verify on his or her own my rationale. With 
179. Bélmez, which is seventy-five miles to the southeast of Zafra, is a village in the 
province of C
órd
oba. “Occupied square” refers to the rule that permitted the bishop and the 
queen to leap over a square that a pawn or another piece already occupied; “touched piece” 
is a rule that requires the player to move the piece that he touches first; “shadowed square” 
requires the player to place the piece on the square that he touches initially.

114 BooK I
respect to the strategies that are successful, they include offensive and de-
fensive strategies. If we were to illustrate only offensive strategies, a player 
would not know how to defend against an attack. It seemed to me, there-
fore, reasonable to address the offense and then the defense in games that 
begin equally and games that begin with an advantage. The explanations 
will benefit more the players who begin a game equally than the players 
who compete in a game that begins with an advantage for one player. In 
the latter, only one of the two players will find the discussion helpful, 
because it is presumed that the player who gives an advantage is already 
knowledgeable and skillful. Consequently, a game that begins with an 
advantage is arranged more favorably for the player who has the advan-
tage than the player who gives it.
We will also illustrate strategies for the player who gives the advan-
tage, including how to arrange well. We will discuss, for example, the 
strategy players can use in a game if they do not intend to play until the 
end. One reason not to play a game to the end is because it would nev-
er finish. In part 2, chapter 3 of Ars versificatoria, Matthew of Vendôme 
writes: “Infinitas nouerca est disciplinae et amica confusionis.”180 Infin-
ity is the stepmother of discipline and the friend of confusion. The other 
reason not to play a game until the end is that a player cannot learn well 
from an interminable game. The same Matthew writes in part 1, chapter 
8: “Prolixitas nouerca est memoriae.” Prolixity is the stepmother of mem-
ory. As Horace says in the Ars poetica: “Quicquid praecipies, esto brevis, 
ut cito dicta percipiant animi dociles teneantque fideles.”181 Be brief in all 
that is demonstrated, because the obedient faculties perceive well what 
they are told and retain the information faithfully until it is needed. In 
the first book, chapter 10 of Rethoric artis veteris, Tullius writes: “Saepe 
res parum est intellecta longitudine magis quam obscuritate narratio-
nis.”182 Often, it says, prolixity, not an obscure narration, is the reason 
something is misunderstood.
180. Matthaeus Vindocinensis was a twelfth-century French writer who is the author of 
two treatises: Ars versificatoria and Ars dictaminis.
181. Lines 335–36.
182. This quotation appears in Cicero’s De inventione, book 1, chapter 29. L
ópe
z must 
have been thinking of Rhetorica ad Herennium, another book on rhetoric, once attributed 
to Cicero.

 BooK I                                                   115
In order to promote understanding and retention, I will address as 
briefly as I can how to begin and how to arrange games. Instead of ex-
plaining how to play and to arrange a game until the end, I will propose 
how to gain an advantage with a piece or a pawn. A well-arranged game 
cultivates many skillful moves and favorable outcomes, because the play-
er is able to attack the enemy with all of the pieces and the pawns. This 
strategy is not possible in a poorly arranged game. The importance of a 
well-arranged game should be not be underestimated, for, as in the case of 
a good captain who arranges his army well for the battle, a good arrange-
ment is essential. As Vegetius says in the third book, chapter 14 of De re 
militari: “Acies dicitur exercitus instructus, frons quae aduersum hostem 
spectat. Haec in publica pugna si sapienter disponitur, plurimum iuuat, si 
inperite quamuis optimi bellatores sint, mala ordinatione franguntur.” It 
says the front of the army that faces the enemy is in the public fight; if it is 
wisely prepared, it helps very much. If the front of the army is poorly ar-
ranged, even though it consists of the best warriors, it will be divided and 
in disarray. In the same way, good players have to begin their games with 
the king’s or queen’s pawns, which, as we will demonstrate later, are the 
front of the army. The other ways to begin a game are not successful or 
valued by good players, unless the condition of the game requires them, as 
will be shown. As the same Vegetius says in book 3, title 26: “Paucos uiros 
fortes natura procreat, bona institutione plures reddit industria.” It says 
nature produces few strong men, but skill with good institution makes 
many. In other words, nature engenders few excellent players, but skill 
with good instruction and proper disposition produces many. Even if a 
player knows little about the game of chess, a well-arranged game is con-
ducive to a strong defense. Furthermore, the same player may be capable 
of defeating a great player if the latter’s game is not well arranged, accord-
ing to what we see from the experience of playing each day.
This skirmish begins first with the front pawns. In other words, the 
good captains are not exposed to the danger that is ever-present on an 
open battlefield. Once their pawns are engaged, the pieces, clandestinely, 
kill the enemy or certainly scare them. According to what Vegetius says in 
book 3, title 9: “Boni enim duces non aperto proelio, in quo est commune 

116 BooK I
periculum, sed ex occulto semper adtemptant, ut integris suis, quantum 
possunt, hostes interimant uel certe terreant.”183 In addition to what has 
been said about ways to play and to arrange the games, I try to illustrate 
the specifics of Damiano’s errors, as well as the mistakes of others who 
are unable to teach effectively how to play the game of chess. The chap-
ters that follow consist of detailed explanations. I will begin by showing 
the offenses and defenses that are common to games that begin equally 
[book 2]. Then, I will discuss Damiano’s offenses and defenses, including 
his errors, and propose ways to improve the offense and the defense [book 
3]. Last, I will illustrate the many ways a player who has an advantage can 
arrange his game [book 4]. In addition, I will explain Damiano’s errors 
and propose corrections.
183. “For good generals do not attack in open battle where the danger is mutual, but do 
it always from a hidden position, so as to kill or at least terrorize the enemy while their own 
men are unharmed as far as possible” (Vegetius, Epitome of Military Science, 83–84).

BOOK II



 119
chapt
er 1
The first way to arrange the game  
with the first move
White will begin, moving the king’s pawn to the extent that it moves 
[1.e4]. If Black were to play the king’s pawn to the extent that it moves 
[1...e5], White would move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [2.c3].
If Black were to play the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2...
Nf6] in order to capture the opposing king’s pawn [Nxe4], White would 
move the queen to her bishop’s second square [3.Qc2].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of his queen’s bish-
op [3...Bc5], White will move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third 
s qu a re   [4 . Nf 3].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to her bishop’s third square [4...Nc6] in 
order to protect the king’s pawn [e5], White will move the king’s bishop to 
the opposing queen’s knight’s fourth square [5.Bb5], attacking the knight.
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [5...d6] to protect the king’s 
pawn [e5], White will play the queen’s pawn [6.d4] to the extent that it 
can move against the opponent’s bishop. If Black took it with his king’s 
pawn [6...exd4], which is the best move, White would take the oppo-
nent’s pawn with the queen’s bishop’s pawn [7.cxd4].
If Black were to give check with the bishop to the fourth square of the op-
posing queen’s knight [7...Bb4+], White would cover it with the queen’s 
knight to the bishop’s third square [8.Nc3].
If Black were to move the queen’s bishop to the queen’s second square 
in order to remove the knight from covering the king [8...Bd7], White 
would move the king’s rook to the bishop’s square to transpose it [9.Rf1].
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will arrange his game very well; 
he has the game arranged better and his pieces will attack the enemy 
more effectively.

120 BooK II
Note. When Black protected the king’s pawn [e5] with the queen’s knight 
[4...Nc6],  the  better  move  would  have  been  if  Black  were  to  protect  
it with the queen [4...Qe7], because White could not push the queen’s 
pawn as far as it goes [6.d4], since Black would take the opposing queen’s 
pawn [6...exd4] and then the king’s pawn with the queen [7...Qxe4], giv-
ing check [7...Qe4+]. Let White do whatever it wants, because Black, 
knowing how to play, will win the game, if White were to move the 
queen’s pawn [6.d4] as we said.
chapter 2
Another way for the player with the first move  
to open and to arrange the game
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can [1.e4]. If Black plays the 
king’s pawn as far as it will go [1...e5], White moves the queen’s bishop’s 
pawn one square [2.c3].
If Black were to move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2...
Nf6] in order to capture the opposing pawn [Nxe4], White would move 
his queen to his bishop’s second square [3.Qc2] to protect the pawn.
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3...Bc5], White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can to 
break open the opponent’s position [4.f4].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [4...Ng4], White will move the king’s knight to his bishop’s 
third square [5.Nf3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the second square of the opposing 
king’s bishop [5...Nf2] in order to capture the rook, White will move the 
queen’s pawn as far as it can toward the opponent’s bishop [6.d4].
If Black takes the opposing pawn with his king’s pawn [6...exd4], White 
will take the knight with his queen [7.Qxf2].

 BooK II                                                  121
But if Black were not to take the aforementioned pawn before it took the 
rook with his knight [7...Nxh1], White would take the bishop with his 
queen’s pawn [8.dxc5].
If Black takes the bishop’s pawn with the pawn of his king [8...exf4], 
White will take the opponent’s pawn with the queen’s bishop [9.Bxf4]. 
And knowing how to play thus, White will win the game, because the 
king, jumping to the square of his knight, over the bishop, will have cap-
tured the knight, because the knight is trapped.1 The player should al-
ways keep in mind how the enemy will react.
Note. But if, before capturing the rook as said, Black gives check on the 
second square of the opposing king’s bishop [5...Bf2+], White would play 
his king to his second square [6.Ke2].
If Black does not remove his bishop, White will win a piece, moving the 
king’s rooks’s pawn one square and into position to capture the oppo-
nent’s knight [hxg4].
But if Black removes his bishop and places it on the third square of his 
queen’s knight [Bb6], White will win the king’s pawn by taking it with 
his bishop’s pawn [fxe5], and in this way White will be left with a pawn 
advantage and a good game, if he knows how to play.
chapter 3
Another way to arrange the game,  
beginning similarly
White plays the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4]. If Black also plays 
the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move the queen’s 
bishop’s pawn one square [2.c3].
If Black threatens the opponent’s pawn with the king’s knight [2...Nf6], 
White will protect the pawn by moving his queen to the bishop’s second 
square [3.Qc2].
1. It was possible for the king to leap a piece in the earliest versions of chess. See book 
1, chapter 10.

122 BooK II
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3...Bc5], White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go 
[4 . f 4].
If Black takes the pawn with the king’s pawn [4...exf4], White will move 
the queen’s pawn as far as it can go toward the opposing bishop [5.d4]. 
Then, White will take the opponent’s king’s pawn with the queen’s bish-
op, arranging his game better than his enemy [6.Bxf4].2
But if, before Black takes the pawn with his king’s pawn, he took the 
opponent’s king’s knight with his bishop [4...Bxg1], White would take 
the bishop with his rook [5.R xg1], which is the best possible move, for if 
White were to take the king’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn [5.fxe5], ad-
vancing toward the opponent’s knight, Black would take the rook’s pawn 
with his bishop [5...Bxh2]. By taking the rook’s pawn, Black would have 
won a pawn because White does not know how to play.
Returning to the stated purpose above, which is when Black takes the 
knight with his bishop [4...Bxg1], White takes the bishop with his rook 
[5.R xg1]. If Black were to take the bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn 
[5...exf4] then, White would move the queen’s pawn one square [6.d3], 
discovering the bishop against the opposing king’s pawn.3
If Black moves the knight to the rook’s fourth square [6...Nh5], protect-
ing the pawn, White will move the queen to the second square of his 
king’s bishop [7.Qf2] to be in position to capture the pawn.
If  Black  were  to  protect  the  pawn  by  moving  his  queen  to  the  third  
square of the king’s bishop [7...Qf6], White would move the king’s bishop 
[8.Be2] in position to capture the opponent’s knight. In this way, White 
would win the pawn by force and place the enemy in a bad position.
But if Black were not to protect his pawn with the queen, but rather 
with the king’s knight’s pawn, moving it as far as it can go [7...g5], White 
2. It is Black ’s turn to move, but López does not state this, in order to focus on how 
White can arrange his game better than his opponent. There are other instances where 
Black or White appear to move out of turn.
3. This sequence of moves is an example of a discovered attack.

 BooK II                                                  123
would move the king’s bishop to the king’s second square [8.Be2], in posi-
tion to capture the opponent’s knight.
If Black moves the king’s knight to its own second square [8...Ng7], 
White will move his king’s knight’s pawn one square [9.g3].
If Black were to take the opponent’s pawn with the pawn of his king [9...
fxg3], White would take [that pawn] with his queen [10.Qxg3], pressuring 
the knight’s pawn. If Black were to protect the knight’s pawn with the 
rook’s pawn [10...h6], White would move the pawn of his king’s rook as 
far as possible to disrupt the enemy [11.h4].
If Black moves the pawn of his king’s bishop one square [11...f6] to pro-
tect the king’s knight’s pawn, White will move the pawn of his king to 
disrupt it [12.e5].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the king’s third square to protect the 
pawn [12...Ne6], White will give check to the king with the [king’s] bish-
op [by moving it] to the fourth square of the opponent’s rook [13.Bh5+]. 
In this way, wherever Black moves, White, knowing how to play, will win 
the game.
But if Black does not move the knight to the king’s third square, as we 
have said [Ne6], but first moves it to the fourth square of the king’s bish-
op [12.Nf5], positioning itself to capture the queen and the rook’s pawn, 
White will move his queen to the knight’s fourth square [13.Q g4], posi-
tioning itself to capture the opponent’s knight.
If Black captures the rook’s pawn with the knight [13...Nxh4], White 
will give check with the queen on the opposing rook’s fourth square 
[14.Qh5+]. If Black moves the king to the bishop’s square [14...Kf8], 
White will capture the knight’s pawn with the queen’s bishop [15.Bxg5].
If Black were to take the queen’s bishop with his [king’s] bishop’s pawn 
[15...fxg5], White would give check with the rook from the king’s bishop’s 
square [16.Rf1+], and then checkmate with the queen from the second 
square of the opponent’s king’s bishop [Qf7#]. If Black makes another 
move, be it known that White will always have the game won by virtue 
of the checkmate.

124 BooK II
Note. But if Black, instead of moving the king’s bishop’s pawn, as it has 
been said, had moved the king’s knight to the king’s third square [11...
Ne6], White would take the knight’s pawn with the rook’s pawn [12.
h x g 5].
If Black moves his king’s rook to the knight’s square [12...Rg8], White 
will move the queen to the second square of his king’s rook [13.Qh2]. 
If Black were to take the [rook’s] pawn with his own rook’s pawn [13...
hxg5], White would move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of his 
knight [14.Bg4].
If Black moves the queen to the second square of his king [14...Qe7], 
White will move the queen to the second square of his opponent’s rook 
[15 .Q h7].
If Black moves the rook to the knight’s second square [15...Rg7], in po-
sition to capture the queen, White will move the queen to the opposing 
rook’s third square [16.Qh6].
If Black moves his rook to the knight’s third square [16...Rg6], in position 
to capture the opponent’s queen, White will give check with his queen 
from the opponent’s rook ’s square [17.Qh8+].
If Black covers the king with his queen [17...Qf8], which is the best move 
possible, White will take the queen [18.Qxf8]. If Black takes the queen 
with his knight [18...Nxf8], White will move the king’s bishop to the 
fourth square of the opposing king’s bishop [19.Bf5], in position to cap-
ture the rook. In this way, White will have preserved his pawn and be left 
with a game that is well arranged.
But Black, instead of moving the rook to the knight’s third square, at-
tacking the queen, could have moved the king’s bishop’s pawn one square 
[16...f6], protecting the rook with the queen, which appears to be a good 
move but is not, because White will move the rook to the bishop’s square 
[17.Rf1], where it can recover the opponent’s pawn and, knowing how to 
play, will win the game.

 BooK II                                                  125
Note. If, when Black took the opponent’s rook’s pawn with his rook’s 
pawn, he had captured it instead with the knight [13.Nxg5], White would 
leap with his king to the second square of his queen’s bishop [14.Kc2] so 
that it could not be given check by the knight attacking the rook if in-
stead of the king’s leap the queen captured the opposing rook’s pawn. By 
jumping, White is left with a good game, because even if Black had a one 
pawn advantage, he would be disorganized.
Note. If, when Black moved the knight to his own second square, it had 
moved it instead to the third square of the king’s bishop [8.Nf6], White 
would move his king’s knight’s pawn one square [9.g3].
If Black were to take the king’s knight’s pawn with the king’s pawn [9...
fxg3], White would take the king’s pawn with his rook’s pawn [10.hxg3].
If Black were to protect the knight’s pawn with his rook’s pawn [10...h6], 
White would move his rook to the square of his bishop [11.Rf1], in posi-
tion to capture the knight [provided that the queen [Qf2] moves].
If Black were to leap his king to his knight’s second square [11...Kg7] in 
order to protect the knight, White would move the pawn of his king one 
square [12.e5] in position to capture the knight [f6], and Black will have 
lost the game.4
But if Black did not protect the knight’s pawn with his rook’s pawn, but 
first protected it with the queen, returning the knight to his designated 
square [10...Ng8], White would move the rook to his bishop’s square [11.
R f 1].
If Black were to move the knight to the third square of his rook [11...
Nh6], which is the best move, to protect the bishop’s pawn, White would 
move his queen to the second square of his king’s rook [12.Qh2], in posi-
tion to capture the knight.
4. The king’s leap is a legal move. López addresses it in book 1, chapter 10. White is 
positioned well to defeat his opponent, whose knight is on [f6] and whose king is on [g7]. 
White has a pawn on [e5], a queen on [f2], and a rook on [f1]. Either the queen or the pawn 
can capture the knight, giving check to the king. If the king were to capture either of the 
pawn or the queen, the rook on [f1] could capture the king [f6].

126 BooK II
And if Black were to return the knight to his square in order not to lose 
it [12...Ng8], White would move his queen to the fourth square of the 
opponent’s rook [13.Qh5], and regardless, knowing how to play, White 
would win the game.
chapt
er 4
Another way to arrange the game  
with the first move
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4]. If Black moves the 
king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop 
to the queen’s bishop’s fourth [square] [2.Bc4].
If Black played likewise [2...Bc5], White would move the queen’s bishop’s 
pawn one square [3.c3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [3...Nf6], 
White will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can [4.d4] to position itself 
to capture the opposing bishop.
If Black were to take the queen’s pawn with the pawn of his king [4...
exd4], White would take the queen’s bishop’s pawn [5.cxd4].
If Black were to give check, moving the bishop to the fourth square of the 
opposing queen’s knight [5...Bb4+], White would protect his king with 
the queen’s bishop [6.Bd2].
Black taking the opponent’s bishop with his bishop [6...Bxd2+], White 
will take the opposing bishop with his knight [7.Nxd2], and thus protect 
also the king’s pawn. In this way, White will still have his bishop to at-
tack the opposing king, but Black will not.
If Black were not to give check with the aforementioned bishop, but, in-
stead, were to move it to his queen’s knight’s third square [5...Bb6], White 
would move his queen’s knight to his bishop’s third square [6.Nc3]. In 
this way, White would be able to arrange his game very well.

 BooK II                                                  127
But if, when Black captured the opposing queen’s pawn with his king’s 
pawn,  White,  before  taking  the  pawn  with  the  pawn  of  his  queen’s  
bishop, first moved his king’s pawn in position to capture the opposing 
knight [5.e5], then if Black were to move the aforementioned knight to 
the fourth square of the opposing king [5...Ne4], White would move 
the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing queen [6.Bd5] in 
position to capture the opponent’s knight, and if Black wanted to wreck 
White’s  position  by  capturing  the  king’s  bishop’s  pawn  [6...Nxf2],  I  
would welcome this decision, because I want the knights more than the 
pawns, and especially at the beginning of the game.
If Black did not want to disrupt White’s position, it would move the 
king’s bishop’s pawn to protect the knight [6...f5]. White would take the 
aforementioned knight with his bishop [7.Bxe4], and Black would take 
the bishop with his bishop’s pawn [7...fxe4]. White would take the king’s 
pawn with the pawn of his queen’s bishop [8.cxd4], and, in this way, 
knowing how to play, would arrange his game well.
Note. If White had moved the king’s pawn one more square toward the 
opposing knight at the beginning [5.e5], Black would have moved his 
queen to the second square of his king [5...Qe7].
If White were to take the opposing king’s pawn with the pawn of his 
queen’s bishop [6.cxd4], Black would give check with his king’s bishop 
from the fourth square of the opposing queen’s knight [6...Bb4+].
If White were to cover the king with his queen’s knight from the bishop’s 
third square [7.Nc3], Black would move his queen’s bishop’s pawn as far 
as it can go [7...c5] to break up White’s game.
If  White  moved  the  king’s  knight  to  the  second  square  of  his  king  
[8.Ne2] in order to remove the king from the opposing queen’s threat, 
Black would move his king’s knight to the opposing king’s fourth square 
[8...Ne4], and, in this way, disrupt White’s game.
If White were to leap the king to his knight’s square [9.Kg1], this is the 
best move possible to ensure his game does not fall apart. With this 
move, White will have arranged his game well, as well as on the offen-

128 BooK II
sive against his enemy, and do not worry that his rook is unable to move, 
because it will be able to move soon.5 White, knowing how to play, has a 
better game than his opponent.
chapter 5
Another way to arrange the game,  
beginning similarly
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4]. If Black makes 
the same move [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop to the fourth 
square of his queen’s bishop [2.Bc4].
If Black moves his king’s bishop to the fourth square of his queen’s bish-
op [2...Bc5], White will move the pawn of his queen’s bishop one square 
[3.c3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [3...Nf6], 
in position to capture the opposing king’s pawn, White will move the 
queen’s pawn as far as it can go toward the opponent’s bishop [4.d4].
If Black were to move his bishop to the knight’s third square [4...Bb6], 
White would take the king’s pawn with the pawn of his queen [5.dxe5].
If  Black  were  to  take  the  opposing  king’s  pawn  with  his  knight  [5...
Nxe4], White would take the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn with his 
king’s bishop, giving check [6.Bxf7+].
If Black took the king’s bishop with his king [6...Kxf7], White would 
give check with his queen, [moving her] to the fourth square of the op-
posing queen [7.Qd5+], past the knight, and in this way White would 
have captured the pawn [dxe5] and made the best move possible.
If Black did not take the bishop, but first moved the king to his bishop’s 
square [6.Kf8], White would move his queen to the third square of his 
5. López addresses the reader. In today’s game of chess, the king’s leap to the knight’s 
square [g1] is the first move in castling. The player then moves the rook to the square over 
which the king crossed [f1].

 BooK II                                                  129
king’s bishop [7.Qf3], and Black would play however it wanted, knowing 
that White would win the game because it knows how to play.
This is because, if Black moved his knight to his own fourth square [7...
Ng5] to be in a position to attack the queen and the bishop, White would 
capture  the  knight  with  his  queen’s  bishop  [8.Bxg5].6  The  opposing  
queen capturing the bishop [8...Qxg5] and placing herself in position to 
capture the opposing king’s pawn, White would move his king’s bishop 
to the fourth square of the opponent’s queen [9.Bd5+], giving discov-
ered check to the king with his queen [f3], which also protects the king’s 
knight’s pawn [g2].
Black moves the king wherever it wants [9...Ke8]; White gives another 
check, moving his queen to the second square of the opponent’s king’s 
bishop [10.Qf7+].
If Black moves his king to the queen’s square [10...Kd8], White will move 
the pawn of his king’s bishop as far as possible toward the opponent’s 
queen [11.f4]. In this way, so will end a very good game.
Note. When Black moved his king to the bishop’s square, if it had instead 
moved it to his king’s second square [6...Ke7], White would not move the 
queen to the third square of the king’s bishop, but instead would move 
it to the fourth square of the opponent’s queen [7.Qd5], which is better.
If Black were to take the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn with his bishop, 
giving check [7...Bxf2+], White would move his king to the king’s second 
s qu a re [8. K e 2].
If Black were to take the knight with his bishop [8...Bxg1], White would 
capture the knight with his rook [9.R xg1].
If Black moved the rook or his queen to the square of his king’s bishop 
[9...Rf8], White would move his rook to the square of his king’s bishop 
[10.Rf1]. In this way, knowing how to play different ways, White would 
win the game.
6. The knight, before White captures it, creates a fork because it can attack either the 
bishop or the queen.

130 BooK II
If Black moves the queen to the square of his king’s bishop [8...Qf8], 
against the opponent’s bishop before capturing the knight with his bish-
op, White will move his bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s rook [9.Bh5].
If Black were to take the knight with his bishop then [9...Bxg1], White 
would capture the knight with his queen [10.Qxe4]. If Black were to give 
check with his queen to the second square of the opponent’s king’s bishop 
[10...Qf2+], White would move the king to his queen’s square [11.Kd1].
If Black, in an effort to position pieces in anticipation of check, moves the 
[queen’s] rook’s pawn one square [11...h6], White will move his queen to 
the third square of the opponent’s king’s knight [12.Q g6].
If Black moves the [queen’s] rook to his knight’s square in order to protect 
the pawn [12...Rg8], White will move the queen’s knight to the queen’s 
second square [13.Nd2].
If Black moves his queen’s knight to his bishop’s third square [13...Nc6], 
White will move his queen’s knight to the king’s fourth square [14.Ne4], 
in position to capture the opponent’s queen.
If Black took the king’s pawn with his knight [14.Nxe5], placing the 
knight in position to capture the opposing queen [g6], White would give 
check with the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing king’s 
knight [15.Bg5+]. In this way, White can either capture the queen or give 
checkmate; and Black can play however it likes, but White, knowing how 
to play, will win the game by force.
Note. If White moves his queen to the opposing queen’s fourth square 
[6.Qd5], where it can attack the opposing knight, it is a very good move to 
win the game, if the king moves to his second square.

 BooK II                                                  131
chapter 6
How Black can arrange his game  
against the aforementioned moves  
without the first move
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4]; Black makes the 
same move [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [2.Bc4], Black will make the same move [2...Bc5].
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [3.c3], Black will 
move his queen to the king’s second square [3...Qe7] so that White can-
not move his queen’s pawn as far as it can go, because White does not 
want to lose the king’s pawn [e4]. In this way, Black will be able to ar-
range his game well.
But if Black did not want to move the queen to the king’s second square, 
and moved the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [3...Nf6], and 
if White were to move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [4.d4], Black 
would capture it with his king’s pawn [4...exd4].
White  would  take  the  queen’s  pawn  with  the  queen’s  bishop’s  pawn  
[5.cxd4], and Black would give check with his bishop to the fourth square 
of the opposing queen’s knight [5...Bb4+].
White  would  protect  his  king  by  moving  the  queen’s  bishop  to  the  
queen’s second square [6.Bd2]. Black would capture the bishop with his 
own [6...Bxd2+]. White would capture with the queen’s knight [7.Nxd2], 
in order to protect the king’s pawn.
Black would move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go toward the oppo-
nent’s bishop in order to break open the game [7...d5].
In this way, whether White takes or does not take, Black, with his pawns 
together, will have arranged his game well. White will be left with the 
queen’s pawn unaccompanied, and can easily lose it.

132 BooK II
chapter 7
Another way to play, opening  
with the king’s pawn
White moves his [king’s] pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black makes the same move [1...e5], White will move his bishop to the 
fourth square of the queen’s bishop [2.Bc4].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [2...Nf6], 
White will move the queen’s pawn one square [3.d3].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop 
[3...Bc5], White will move his king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [4.f4].
If Black moves his queen’s pawn one square [4...d6], White will move the 
king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [5.Nf3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [5...Ng4], White will move his queen to his king’s second 
square [6.Qe2].
If Black gives check with his king’s bishop to the second square of the op-
posing king’s bishop [6...Bf2+], White will move his king to the queen’s 
s q u a re   [7. K d 1].
If Black were to withdraw his bishop to the third square of the queen’s 
knight [7...Bb6], White would move his rook to the king’s bishop’s square 
[8 . R f 1].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [8...Nc6], 
White will move the king’s rook’s pawn one square [9.h3], placing him-
self in a position to capture the opponent’s knight.
If Black moves the aforementioned [king’s] knight to the third square 
of his king’s bishop [9...Nf6], White will move the king’s bishop to the 
fourth square of the opposing queen’s knight [10.Bb5], placing it in posi-
tion to pin the opposing queen’s knight.7
7. A pin is a situation in which a defending piece cannot move without exposing a more 

 BooK II                                                  133
If Black moves the queen’s bishop to the queen’s second square [10...
Bd7] so that the knight is unpinned, White will take the knight with his 
bishop[11.Bxc6], and Black will capture the opponent’s bishop with his 
queen’s bishop [11...Bxc6].
White will take the king’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn [12.fxe5]. If Black 
captures the pawn with his queen’s pawn [12...dxe5], White would take 
the queen’s pawn with his king’s knight [13.Nxe5], placing it in position to 
capture the queen’s bishop.
If Black took the opposing king’s pawn with said bishop [13...Bxe4], be-
cause White’s queen’s pawn is pinned to his king,8 White would move 
his king’s knight to his fourth square [14.Ng4], positioning himself to 
capture the opponent’s knight and then his bishop, and, eventually, the 
whole game.9
If Black were to make a different move, White, it should be noted, knows 
how to play and has a much better game
chapt
er 8
Another way to play, opening with  
the king’s pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black makes the same move [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop 
to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [2.Bc4].
If Black were to move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s 
bishop [2...Bc5], White would move the queen to the king’s second square 
[3 .Qe2].
valuable piece next to it to capture. After Black moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s 
third square [Nc6], the knight is pinned by the opponent’s bishop [Bb5], because the knight 
is the only piece between the bishop and the king. When Black moves his queen’s bishop to 
the queen’s second square [Bd7], however, the bishop unpins the knight, because the bishop 
is the only piece between the opponent’s bishop and the king.
8. In other words, the pawn cannot move because it is pinned to the king.
9. After White moves his knight to his king’s knight’s fourth square [Ng4], the knight 
is in position to capture the opponent’s knight [Nf6] and then the opponent’s bishop [Be4].

134 BooK II
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [3...d6], White will move the 
queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4.c3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [4...Nf6], 
White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it will go [5.f4].
If Black took the king’s bishop’s pawn [5...exf4], White would move his 
queen’s pawn as far as it can go in the direction of the opposing bishop 
[6.d4]. Then, he would capture the king’s pawn with the queen’s bishop 
[7. Bx f 4].
If Black, before he captures the pawn, were to take the king’s knight 
with his bishop [5...Bxg1], White would take the bishop with his rook 
[6. R x g 1] .
If Black were to take the bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn [6...exf4], 
White would move his queen’s pawn one square [7.d3], revealing the 
queen’s bishop on the pawn.
If Black were to protect the pawn by moving the king’s knight’s pawn as 
far as it can go [7...g5], White would move his king’s knight’s pawn one 
s qu a re   [8. g 3].
If Black took the bishop’s pawn [8...fxg3], White would take the knight’s 
pawn with his queen’s bishop [9.Bxg5]. If Black were to take the rook’s 
pawn [9...gxh2], White would capture it with his queen [10.Qxh2].
If Black moves his rook to the knight’s square [10...Rg8], in position 
to capture the opposing bishop, White would be able to put himself in 
position to capture two pawns, the king’s bishop’s pawn and the king’s 
rook’s pawn, by taking the knight with his bishop [11.Bxf6]. Because if 
Black were to take the rook with his own rook, giving check [11...R xg1+], 
White would take the rook with his queen [12.Qxg1].
If Black were to take the bishop with his queen [12...Qxf6], White would 
give check in the knight’s square [13.Q g8+].
If Black were to move his king to his queen’s second square [13...Kd7] so 
as not to lose the queen’s bishop, White would take the king’s bishop’s 
pawn with his queen’s bishop [14.Bxf7].

 BooK II                                                  135
If Black, in order to avoid checkmate, moved his queen to the king’s sec-
ond square [14...Qe7], White would take the rook’s pawn with his queen 
[15.Qxh7]. In this way, it would be able to move freely and have an advan-
tage of one pawn.
If White did not want to make this move [11.Bxf6], it could move the 
king’s  pawn  one  square  [11.e5],  placing  it  in  position  to  capture  the  
knight, which is a better move. If Black did capture the king’s pawn with 
his queen’s pawn [11...dxe5], White would take the king’s pawn with his 
queen, placing the king in check [12.Qxe5+]. Whatever Black may do, 
White, knowing how to play, will win the game no matter what.
Note. If Black did not move his rook to the knight’s square, but first 
moved the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [10...Nd7] in order 
to protect the king’s knight, White would move the rook to his king’s 
bishop’s square [11.Rf1], placing it in position to capture the king’s knight.
If Black then moved his [king’s] rook to the [king’s] knight’s square [11...
Rg8], White would take the rook’s pawn with his queen [12.Qxh7], mak-
ing it difficult for the opposing king to avoid check.
If Black were to take the queen with his knight [12...Nxh7], White would 
take the king’s bishop’s pawn with his queen’s bishop, placing the king in 
c he c k   [13 . Bx f 7+].
If Black were to move his king to the bishop’s square [13...Kf8], as it is the 
only option, White would take the queen with his [queen’s] bishop [14.
Bxd8].
In this way, White, knowing how to play the entire game, will have cap-
tured three pawns and have an advantage of two pawns, in addition to 
the better arranged game.

136 BooK II
chapter 9
Another way to play, opening  
with the king’s pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves his king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [2.Bc4].
If Black likewise moves his king’s bishop to the fourth square of the 
queen’s bishop [2...Bc5], White will move his queen to the second square 
of his king [3.Qe2].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [3...d6], White will move the 
queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4.c3].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [4...Nc6], 
White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [5.f4].
If Black were to take the king’s bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn [5...
exf4], White would move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [6.d4], plac-
ing it in position to capture the opposing bishop.
If Black were to give check with the queen from the opposing rook’s 
fourth square [6...Qh4+], White would move his king to his queen’s 
s q u a re   [7. K d 1].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [7...Bg4], White will move his king’s knight to his bishop’s 
third square [8.Nf3], protecting it from the opponent’s bishop and posi-
tioning it to capture the opponent’s queen.
If Black were to take the king’s knight with the queen’s bishop [8...Bxf3], 
White would take the opposing queen’s bishop with his queen [9.Qxf3].10
10. López informs the reader that Black is able to sacrifice his queen’s bishop in order to 
capture a knight because he still has the king’s bishop. In addition, L
ópe
z notes that Black 
and White have the same number of pieces on the board, a reference to the king’s bishop’s 
pawn, which Black captured earlier.

 BooK II                                                  137
But if Black did not move the queen’s bishop as we have said, but instead 
were to withdraw the king’s bishop to the third square of the queen’s 
knight [7...Bb6], White would move his king’s knight to his bishop’s 
third square [8.Nf3], placing it in position to capture the opposing queen.
If Black moves his queen to the fourth square of the opposing king’s 
knight [8...Q g4], protecting his pawn, White will move the [king’s] 
rook’s pawn one square [9.h3], placing it in position to capture the oppo-
nent’s queen.
If Black moves the queen to the third square of the aforementioned 
knight [9...Q g3], still protecting the pawn, White will move the queen’s 
knight to his queen’s second square [10.Nd2].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [10...Nf6], 
White will move the king’s rook to the king’s square [11.Re1].
If Black moves his king’s knight to his rook’s fourth square [11...Nh5] to 
protect the pawn, White will move the king’s pawn one square forward 
[1 2 . e5].
And so, knowing how to play, White should be advised that even if his 
play is met differently, he will always have a good game.
chapt
er 10
Another way to arrange the game,  
beginning similarly
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s bishop to the fourth square of his queen’s bishop [2.Bc4].
If Black makes the same move [2...Bc5], White will move his queen to his 
king’s second square [3.Qe2].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [3...d6], White will move the 
pawn of his queen’s bishop one square [4.c3].

138 BooK II
If Black moves his queen’s knight to his bishop’s third square [4...Nc6], 
White will move the pawn of his king’s bishop as far as it can go [5.f4].
If Black were to take the opposing king’s knight with his bishop [5...
Bxg1], White would capture the bishop with his rook [6.R xg1].
If Black took the bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn [6...exf4], White 
would move his queen’s pawn as far as it can go [7.d4].
If Black were to give check with his queen to the fourth square of the op-
ponent’s rook [7...Qh4+], White would protect the king with his knight’s 
paw n   [8. g 3].
If Black took the knight’s pawn with his king’s pawn [8...fxg3], White 
would take the king’s pawn with his rook [9.R xg3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [9...Nf6], 
White will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the oppos-
ing king’s knight [10.Bg5], placing it in position to capture the opponent’s 
queen and knight.
If Black moves his queen to his rook’s fourth square [10...Qh5] in order to 
exchange queens, White will move his queen to the second square of his 
king’s knight [11.Q g2].
If Black moves his king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [11...Ng4], White will withdraw the queen’s bishop to the 
queen’s second square [12.Bd2].
If Black took the rook’s pawn with his queen [12...Qxh2], White would 
take the knight with his rook [13.R xg4], winning it.
If Black, instead of taking the pawn with his queen, captures the pawn 
with his knight [12...Nxh2], White will move the king’s bishop to his 
king’s second square [13.Be2], placing it in position to take the opponent’s 
queen.
In this way, White will win the knight, or the queen if [Black] prefers to 
keep the knight.

 BooK II                                                  139
Since we will speak more about this in another game, I will not continue 
to discuss this way of playing, because, regardless of how the opponent 
plays, White has a good game if he knows how to play.
chapter 11
Another way to arrange the game, opening  
with the king’s pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black makes the same move [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop 
to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [2.Bc4].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [2...c6], White will 
move his queen to his king’s second square [3.Qe2].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3...Bc5], White will move the pawn of his king’s bishop as far as it can 
go [4.f4].
If Black took the king’s bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn [4...exf4], 
White would move the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [5.Nf3].
If Black were to withdraw the king’s bishop to his queen’s knight’s third 
square [5...Bb6], White would move his queen’s pawn as far as it can go 
[6. d 4] .
If Black moves the king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go to protect his 
pawn [6...g5], White will advance the pawn of his king’s rook as far as it 
can go to disrupt the opponent [7.h4].
If Black were to advance the [king’s] knight’s pawn one square forward 
[7...g4], placing it in position to capture the opponent’s knight, White 
would move his knight to the fourth square of the opposing king [8.Ne5] 
in order to take the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn.
If Black moves his [king’s] knight to the third square of his rook [8...
Nh6], White has, of course, many good moves he can make, among oth-

140 BooK II
ers pushing the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square to protect his queen’s 
pawn.11
The move that gives me the most pleasure, because it keeps the enemy 
constricted, is capturing the opposing queen’s bishop’s pawn with the 
bishop [9.Bxf4], placing it in position to take the knight.
If Black were to take the queen’s pawn with his king’s bishop [9...Bxd4], 
placing it in position to take the opposing king’s knight, White would ad-
vance the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [10.c3], attacking the bishop.
If Black took the knight with his bishop so as not to lose a piece [10...
Bxe5], White would take the bishop with his bishop [11.Bxe5], placing it 
in position to take the opposing king’s rook.
If Black moves the pawn of his king’s bishop one square toward the oppo-
nent’s bishop [11...f6], protecting his rook, White will move said bishop 
to the opposing queen’s third square [12.Bd6] in order to keep the oppo-
nent’s pieces imprisoned.
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will win the game easily, de-
spite having one less pawn, because the enemy is in disarray as a result 
of the position of his king. In addition, Black’s king is unable to find a 
comfortable place where it feels safe, because it cannot play freely with 
his pieces.
Note. When, near the beginning, White moved the pawn of his king’s 
bishop as far as it could go, if Black, instead of taking it, had captured 
the opposing king’s knight with his bishop [4...Bxg1], White would have 
taken the bishop with his rook [5.R xg1].
If Black then were to take the bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn [5...
exf4], White would move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [6.d4].
If Black were to give check with his queen from the fourth square of 
the opposing rook [6...Qh4+], White would protect the king with the 
knight’s pawn [7.g3].
11. Henceforth, López offers several variations to the moves he has played to this point 
in the chapter.

 BooK II                                                  141
If Black were to take the knight’s pawn with his king’s pawn [7...fxg3], 
White would capture the knight’s pawn with his rook [8.R xg3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the third square of the bishop [8...
Nf6] in order to capture the king’s pawn, White, in order to ascertain 
how much his opponent knows about playing chess, will move his queen’s 
knight to the bishop’s third square [9.Nc3] to protect his pawn.
If Black moved the king’s knight to the rook’s fourth square [9...Nh5], 
in position to capture the opponent’s rook, which is covering the king, 
White would take the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn with his bishop, giv-
ing check [10.Bxf7+].
If Black does not take the bishop, it will lose the knight. If Black captures 
the bishop [10...Kxf7], it will lose his queen or perhaps even the whole 
game, because White will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of 
the opposing king’s knight [11.Bg5], positioning it to capture the queen.
If Black were to take the rook with his knight [11...Nxg3], placing it in 
position to capture the opponent’s queen, White would move his queen 
to the third square of the king’s bishop, giving check [12.Qf3+]. On his 
next move, [White] would capture the queen [with the queen’s bishop] 
[13 . Bx h 4].
But if Black were not to take the rook with his knight, instead moving 
this knight to the fourth square of the [opposing] king’s bishop [11...
Nf4], placing it in position to capture the queen, White would give check 
with his queen from his own bishop’s fourth square [12.Qc4+].
If Black were to protect the king with the queen’s pawn as far as it can 
move toward the opponent’s queen [12...d5], White would take it with 
his knight [13.Nxd5]. And if Black took the opposing rook’s pawn with 
his queen [13...Qxh2], White would take the knight with his bishop [14.
Bx f4].
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will win the game in all ways.
Note. If Black moved the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square to 
place it in position to capture the king’s pawn or to threaten the rook, as 

142 BooK II
we have said, then White would not have wanted to tempt Black by mov-
ing the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [9.Nc3], which would 
give Black an opportunity to flee.12 Instead, White chose to move the 
queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [9.Bg5], 
placing it in a position to capture the queen and the knight.
If Black moves the queen to the fourth square of his king’s rook [9...Qh5] 
in order to exchange it for the opposing queen, White will not exchange 
but rather move his queen to the second square of the king’s knight [10.
Q g 2].
If Black moves the [king’s] rook’s pawn in position to capture the oppo-
nent’s bishop [10...h6], White will move the king’s bishop to his king’s 
second square [11.Be2], in position to take the opposing queen. If Black 
plays it to the third square of his king’s knight’s [11...Q g6], White plays 
his queen’s bishop to the queen’s second square [12.Bd2], discovering the 
rook on the opposing queen.
If Black moves the queen to the second square of the king’s rook [12...
Qh7], White will move the king’s pawn in position to take the opposing 
king’s knight [13.e5].
If Black were to move the king’s knight wherever it wants, it will lose the 
piece or the whole game.
But if Black did not move the king’s knight, first taking the opposing 
queen’s bishop’s pawn with his queen [13...Qxc2], White would capture 
the knight with the king’s pawn [14.exf6].
If Black were to take the opposing queen’s knight’s pawn with his queen 
[14...Qxb2], White would capture the opposing knight’s pawn with his 
pawn [15.fxg7], placing it in position to capture the opponent’s rook.
If Black were to move the rook to his knight’s square [15...Rg8], White 
would give check with his queen from his king’s fourth square [16.Qe4+].
12. If White, instead of trying to capture the opponent’s queen, moved the queen’s 
knight to the bishop’s third square [Nc3], Black would be able to remove his queen from 
possible capture.

 BooK II                                                  143
If Black moved the king to his queen’s square [16...Kd8], White would 
give check once again with the same queen from his king’s rook’s fourth 
s q u a re   [17.Q h 4+].
In this way, White will have won the game no matter what, and I will not 
address it more since the moves are evident.
chapt
er 12
Another way to arrange the game, opening  
with the king’s pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s bishop to the fourth square of his queen’s bishop [2.Bc4].
If Black moves his king’s bishop to the fourth square of his queen’s bishop 
[2...Bc5], White will move the queen to the king’s second square [3.Qe2].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to his bishop’s third square [3...Nc6], 
White will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4.c3].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [4...d6], White will move the 
king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [5.f4].
If Black took the king’s bishop’s pawn with the king’s pawn [5...exf4], 
White would move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [6.Nf3].
If Black moves the [king’s] knight’s pawn as far as it can go [6...g5] to 
protect his pawn, White will move the pawn of his king’s rook as far as it 
can go [7.h4].
If Black moves the knight’s pawn one square forward, in position to cap-
ture the opposing knight [7...g4], White will move the aforementioned 
knight to the fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [8.Ng5].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the fourth square of his king [8...
Ne5], in order to protect the pawn of his king’s bishop, White will move 

144 BooK II
the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [9.d4], placing it in position to cap-
ture the opponent’s bishop and knight.13
If Black were to take the opposing king’s bishop with the aforementioned 
knight [9...Nxc4], White would take the knight with his queen [10.
Q xc4].
If Black were to move the queen to his king’s second square to avoid mate 
[10...Qe7], White would take the king’s bishop with the pawn of his 
queen [11.dxc5].
If Black moves the pawn of his king’s rook into position to capture the 
opposing knight [11...h6], White will take the queen’s pawn with his own 
queen’s pawn [12.cxd6].
If Black captures the queen’s pawn with the pawn of his queen’s bishop 
[12...cxd6], White will take the king’s bishop’s pawn with his queen, giv-
ing check [13.Qxf7+].
If Black captures the queen with his queen [13...Qxf7], White will take 
the queen with his knight [14.Nxf7].
If Black takes the knight with his king [14...Kxf7], White will take the 
king’s pawn with his queen’s bishop [15.Bxf4].
In this way, White will have one more pawn than Black and the better 
game.
Note. If when Black moved the queen’s knight, as we have said, it moved 
instead the king’s knight to his rook’s third square [8...Nh6] to protect 
the bishop’s pawn, White would have moved the queen’s pawn [9.d4] as 
far as it can go, placing it in position to capture the bishop.
If Black were to withdraw the bishop to the third square of the queen’s 
knight [9...Bb6], White would capture the king’s pawn with his queen’s 
bishop [10.Bxf4].
13. This is another example of a fork, because the pawn [d4] can capture either the 
knight [dxe5] or the bishop [dxc5].

 BooK II                                                  145
If Black moved his queen to his king’s second square [10...Qe7] to try to 
win the opposing king’s knight, White would move the king’s rook to the 
square of his bishop [11.Rf1]. In this way, it will have an excellent game 
and, knowing how to play, will defeat the enemy.
chapt
er 13
Another way to arrange the game  
with the king’s pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black took it [2...exf4], White would move the king’s knight to his 
bishop’s third square [3.Nf3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [3...Nf6], 
White will move the king’s pawn one square forward, against the oppos-
ing knight [4.e5].
If Black moves his queen to his king’s second square [4...Qe7], White will 
move his queen to the king’s second square [5.Qe2].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of his rook [5...
Nh5], protecting his pawn, White will move the queen’s knight to his 
bishop’s third square [6.Nc3].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [6...c6] to prevent 
the opposing knight from threatening the queen, White will move the 
aforementioned knight to his king’s fourth square [7.Ne4].
In this way, even though White has one less pawn, knowing how to play, 
he has a good game: White attacks the enemy and Black is constricted. 
And we have seen enough of this way of playing.

146 BooK II
chapter 14
Another way to arrange the game,  
beginning similarly and playing as in Italy,  
where the pawn passes battle
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black took the king’s bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn [2...exf4], 
White would move the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [3.Nf3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [3...Nf6], 
White will move the king’s pawn one square forward [4.e5], placing it in 
position to capture the knight.
If Black moves the knight to his king’s rook’s fourth square [4...Nh5], 
White, playing “to pass battle,” will move the king’s knight’s pawn as far 
as it will go [5.g4].14
But if for this reason Black does not move the knight as said, but first 
moves the queen to the king’s second square [4...Qe7], White will move 
his queen to the king’s second square in order to provide protection for 
the king [5.Qe2].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of his queen [5...
Nd5], White will move the pawn of his queen’s bishop as far as it can go 
[6.c4], placing it in position to capture the knight.
If Black moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [6...Nb4], positioning the knight to give check, White 
will move the pawn of his queen as far as it can go [7.d4] to defend a 
14. In Italy, players did not observe the en passant capture rule. Instead, they played 
passar bataglia (to pass battle). Unlike en passant, passar bataglia does not permit a pawn to 
capture the opposing pawn when it moves two squares from its starting square and could 
have been captured if it had moved only one square.

 BooK II                                                  147
likely check with his queen, opening the way for the queen’s bishop to be 
against the opposing king’s pawn.15
If Black moves his king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [7...g5] to pro-
tect the king’s pawn, White will move the pawn of his king’s rook one 
s qu a re   [8. h3].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [8...d6], which appears to be 
a good move, White would not take it with the pawn of his king, because 
he would lose the queen’s rook sooner or later. Instead, he would move 
the pawn of his queen’s rook one square [9.a3], placing it in position to 
capture the opposing knight [that could capture the rook later in the 
g a me].
If Black moves the aforementioned knight to his queen’s bishop’s third 
square [9...Nc6], White will move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s 
third square [10.Nc3].
If Black were to move his king’s knight’s pawn one square closer [10...g4] 
to capturing the opposing king’s knight, White would take it with the 
rook ’s pawn [11.hxg4].
If Black took the opposing rook’s pawn with his queen’s bishop [11...
Bxg4]—all of these moves seem to be good and attack the enemy—White 
would move the queen to the fourth square of his king [12.Qe4].
If Black were to take the knight with his bishop [12...Bxf3], White would 
take the bishop with his knight’s pawn [13.gxf3].
If Black took the king’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [13...dxe5], White 
would move the queen’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen [14.Nd5], placing it in position to capture the opposing queen.
If Black moves the queen to her own third square [14...Qd6], which ap-
pears to be the best move, White will take the pawn on the king’s fourth 
square with his queen’s pawn [15.dxe5].
15. Currently, Black has his knight on [b4] and would be able to give check from [c2]. If 
Black moved to [c2], White would capture the knight with his queen [Qxc2].

148 BooK II
If Black took the pawn with his knight [15...Nxe5] and not with his queen 
so as not to lose the rook, White, if he knows how to play, would win the 
game by force either by taking the king’s pawn with his queen’s bishop 
[16.Bxf4], placing it in position to capture the knight, or by moving the 
queen’s bishop’s pawn in position to capture the opposing queen [16.c5].16
But earlier, when Black took the knight with his queen’s bishop, if instead 
of the capture he first moved the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it could go 
[12...f5] to be in position to capture the opposing queen, and playing, as 
we have said, “passing battle,” White would take the pawn that is on the 
fourth square of the king’s bishop with his queen [13.Qxf4].17
If Black took then the knight with the queen’s bishop [13...Bxf3], White 
would take the queen’s bishop with his knight’s pawn [14.gxf3].
If Black were to take the king’s pawn with the pawn of his queen [14...
dxe5], White would capture the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn with his 
q ue e n   [15 .Q x f 5].
If Black took the queen’s pawn with his pawn, giving discovered check 
[15...exd4+], White would cover it by moving the knight to the king’s 
fourth square [16.Ne4].
And thus, although Black has one more pawn, White would have the bet-
ter game, because his pieces attack the enemy. If the play went differently 
than what has been said, White should take notice that if he knows how 
to play, he will win. Black, on the other hand, has no choice but to hope 
that he wins tomorrow.
16. If Black were to capture the king’s pawn with his queen [Qxe5], the opposing queen 
would capture his queen [Qxe5], positioning it to capture his rook diagonally [Qxh8].
17. A player is not obligated to capture a pawn en passant.

 BooK II                                                 149
chapter 15
Another way to arrange the game,  
beginning similarly
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves likewise [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn 
as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black took it [2...exf4], White would move his king’s knight to the 
bishop’s third square [3.Nf3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [3...Nf6], 
White will move the king’s pawn one square [4.e5], placing it in position 
to capture the knight.
If, not playing “passing battle,” Black moves the knight to his rook’s 
fourth square [4...Nh5], White will move his queen’s pawn as far as it can 
go [5.d 4].
If Black moves the king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go to protect the 
pawn [5...g5], White will move the king’s knight to the queen’s second 
square [6.Nd2], positioning the queen to capture the opposing king’s 
knight.
If Black moves the knight to his second square [6...Ng7], White will 
move the king’s knight to the fourth square of his own king [7.Ne4].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to his king’s second square [7...Be7] 
to defend against the knight’s check, White will move the king’s rook’s 
pawn [8. h4] as far as it can go to break open the game.
If Black moves the king’s knight to the third square of his king [8...Ne6], 
White will move the queen’s pawn one square forward [9.d5], placing it 
in position to take the knight.
If Black moves the knight to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [9...
Nc5], White will move the queen’s knight to his bishop’s third square 

150 BooK II
[10.Nc3] and, knowing how to play, White has a good game regardless of 
what Black captures or does.
Note. If White wanted to test the enemy’s knowledge, it would not move 
the queen’s knight, as we have said. Instead, it would capture the oppos-
ing knight with his knight, having moved first the knight to his king’s 
fourth square [10.Nxc5].
If Black took the opposing knight with his bishop [10...Bxc5], White 
would move his queen to the fourth square of the opposing rook [11.Qh5], 
placing it in position to take the knight’s pawn.
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen [11...Bd4], which appears to be the best move, White will capture 
the opposing knight’s pawn with the pawn of his rook [12.hxg5].
If Black took the opposing king’s pawn with his bishop [12...Bxe5], White 
would move his rook’s pawn one square [13.g6], discovering his queen 
against the opposing bishop.
If Black moves his queen to the second square of his king [13...Qe7], 
White will capture the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn with his pawn, giv-
ing check [14.gxf7+].
If Black moves his king to his bishop’s square [14...Kf8], White will move 
his king’s bishop to the king’s second square [15.Be2] in order to remove 
the king from a discovered check and to vacate the bishop’s square for 
the king’s rook to attack the opponent. And because the bishop is more 
useful there.
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will defeat his enemy by force, 
as his position is wrecked.

 BooK II                                                  151
chapter 16
Another way to open the game with  
the kings’ pawns and the king’s bishop’s pawn, 
beginning similarly
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black took the king’s bishop’s pawn [2...exf4], White would move the 
king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [3.Nf3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his king’s second square [3...Ne7], 
White will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [4.d4].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the knight’s third square [4...Ng6], 
protecting the pawn, White will move the king’s bishop to the fourth 
square of the queen’s bishop [5.Bc4].
If Black moves his queen’s pawn one square [5...d6], White will move the 
king’s rook to the bishop’s square [6.Rf1].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the oppos-
ing king’s knight [6...Bg4], placing it in position to capture the knight, 
White will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [7.c3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s rook [7...Nh4], placing it in position to capture the knight and 
to disrupt his enemy’s game, White will leap to the second square of the 
queen’s bishop with his king [8.Kc2].18
If Black were to take the opposing king’s knight’s pawn with his knight 
[8...Nxg2], White would move the rook to his knight’s square [9.Rg1], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing knight and bishop.
18. López explains the king’s leap, which is not a legal move today, in book 1, chapter 10.

152 BooK II
If Black, in order not to lose a piece, were to move the bishop to the op-
posing rook’s third square [9...Bh3] to protect his knight, White would 
move the queen to his king’s second square [10.Qe2], placing it in position 
to capture the knight.
If Black were to give check from the opposing king’s third square with 
his knight [10...Ne3+], White would capture the knight with his queen’s 
bishop [11.Bxe3].
But if Black moved his knight to the opposing rook’s fourth square [10...
Nh4] instead of giving check, White would move his knight to the op-
posing knight’s fourth square [11.Ng5], placing it in position to capture 
the bishop and the bishop’s pawn.
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will win the game.
But if, instead of moving the queen’s bishop to the rook’s third square, 
Black  first  captured  the  opposing  knight  with  his  bishop  [9...Bxf3],  
White would take the bishop with his queen [10.Qxf3].
If Black moves his knight to the fourth square of the opposing rook [10...
Nh4], White, with his queen, will take the opposing king’s pawn, which 
is on the fourth square of the king’s bishop [11.Qxf4], placing [the queen] 
in position to take the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn. If Black moves the 
queen to his king’s second square [11...Qe7] to protect it, White would 
move his king’s rook to his bishop’s square [12.Rf1].
In this way, White will capture the opposing king’s pawn by force, and 
will take the game if he knows how to play, because if Black moves his 
knight to his own third square [12...Ng3], placing it in position to capture 
the opposing queen, White will capture the bishop’s pawn with his bish-
op, giving check [13.Bxf7+].
If Black moves his king to the queen’s square [13...Kd8], White will move 
his queen to the fourth square of the opposing king’s bishop [14.Qf5].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [14...
Nd7], White will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the 
opposing king’s knight [15.Bg5], pinning the queen.

 BooK II                                                  153
If Black moves his queen’s knight to the third square of the king’s bishop 
[15...Nf6], White will move the king’s pawn one square [16.e5], placing it 
in position to capture the knight.
If Black took the opposing king’s bishop with his queen [16...Qxf7], 
White would take the queen’s knight with his king’s pawn [17.exf6], plac-
ing him in a position to win the game.
But if Black did not take the bishop with his queen, but first captured 
the opposing king’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [16...dxe5], White would 
take the queen’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [17.dxe5], placing it still in a 
position to capture the knight.
If Black were to take this pawn with his queen [17...Qxe5], White would 
capture the opposing king’s knight with his king’s bishop [18.Bxg6].
In this way, White will have won the game by force, because even if Black 
were to give check with his queen from the opposing king’s second square 
[18...Qe2+], White would cover it by moving the queen’s knight to the 
queen’s second square [19.Nd2].
If Black took the bishop with his rook’s pawn [19...hxg6], placing it in 
position to take the queen, White would capture the other knight with 
his queen’s bishop, giving check [20.Bxf6+].
In this way, White will have the game well in hand.
But if when Black captured the pawn with his queen, it had taken instead 
the pawn with his king’s knight [17...Nxe5], White would have given 
check from his queen’s square with his rook [18.Rd1+].
Black would be unable to do anything except block it, moving the king’s 
knight to his queen’s second square [18...Ned7]. White would move the 
king’s bishop to the opposing king’s third square [19.Be6], placing it in 
position to capture the knight.
In this way, Black is hopelessly lost.

154 BooK II
chapter 17
Another way to begin the game with the same kings’ 
pawns and the king’s bishop’s pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves likewise [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn 
as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black took the king’s bishop’s pawn with the pawn of his king [2...
exf4], White would move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of his 
queen’s bishop [3.Bc4].19
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [3...Nf6], 
placing it in position to take the opposing king’s pawn, White will move 
his queen to the third square of his king’s bishop [4.Qf3] in order to cap-
ture the opposing pawn and to protect his own.
If Black moves the queen to the king’s second square [4...Qe7], threaten-
ing the opposing king’s pawn, White will move the queen’s knight to the 
bishop’s third square [5.Nc3] in order to protect it.
If Black moves his king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [5...g5] to pro-
tect his pawn, White will move the pawn of his king’s rook as far as it can 
go [6.h4] to disturb the opponent’s game.
In this way, White, knowing how to play, has a good game.
chapt
er 18
Another way to arrange the game, beginning  
with the aforementioned pawns
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black likewise [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far 
as it can go [2.f4].
19. This move is known as the Bishop’s Gambit.

 BooK II                                                  155
If Black took the king’s bishop’s pawn with the king’s pawn [2...exf4], 
White would move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s 
bishop [3.Bc4].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [3...Nf6], 
White will move the queen, as in the previous game, or if not, then he 
may move it to the king’s second square [4.Qe2].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [4...Bc5], White will move the pawn of his queen’s bishop [5.c3].
If Black moves his king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [5...g5] to pro-
tect his pawn, White will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [6.d4], 
against the opposing bishop.
If Black were to withdraw his bishop to his queen’s knight’s third square 
[6...Bb6], White would move the pawn of his king’s rook as far as it can 
go [7.h4], disturbing the opponent’s game and organizing his own game 
well.
But if Black took the opposing king’s knight with his bishop [5...Bxg1] 
before it moved the king’s knight’s pawn as far as it could go, White 
would take the bishop with his rook [6.R xg1].
Then, if Black moved the knight’s pawn [6...g5] to protect the other pawn, 
as we said, White would move the king’s pawn one square forward [7.e5], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing knight.
If Black were to return the knight to his own square [7...Ng8] so as not 
to lose it, White would move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [8.d4].
If Black moves the queen to the king’s second square [8...Qe7], White 
will move his king’s knight’s pawn one square [9.g3].
If Black were to take the king’s knight’s pawn with his pawn [9...fxg3], 
White would capture the pawn with his rook [10.R xg3], positioning it to 
capture the knight’s pawn.

156 BooK II
If Black were to protect the knight’s pawn, moving the rook’s pawn one 
square [10...h6], White, of course, has good moves, such as his queen to 
the opposing rook’s fourth square [11.Qh5].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [11...Nf6], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing queen, because White can-
not take the knight with his pawn because it is covering his king, White 
could capture the king’s bishop’s pawn with his queen, giving check [12.
Q x f 7+].
If Black captures the queen with his queen [12...Qxf7], White would take 
the queen with his king’s bishop, giving check once again [13.Bxf7+].
If Black takes the bishop with his king [13...Kxf7], White will move his 
rook to the third square of the king’s bishop [14.Rf3], pinning his knight.
In this way, White will have won a pawn, but I do not consider it a good 
game. Consequently, it would be better not to move the queen to the 
rook’s fourth square, as we have said, but first to move the king’s rook’s 
pawn as far as it can go [11.h4].
If Black does not capture the king’s rook’s pawn—so as not to give the 
opposing rook access to the knight’s second square—but, instead, moves 
the king’s bishop’s pawn one square [11...f6], White will give check with 
his queen from the fourth square of the opposing rook [12.Qh5+].
If Black moves the king to his queen’s square [12...Kd8], which is the best 
possible move, White will capture the knight with his bishop [13.Bxg8], 
and, knowing how to play, he has the game well in hand.
If Black takes the bishop with his rook [13...R xg8], White will capture 
the rook’s pawn with his queen [14.Qxh6].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [14...d6], White will capture 
the bishop’s pawn with his queen [15.Qxf6].
If Black were to take the queen with his queen [15...Qxf6], which is the 
best possible move, White would capture the queen with his king’s pawn 
[16. e x f 6].

 BooK II                                                  157
If Black were to give check with his rook, moving to the king’s square 
[16...Re8+], White would move the king to his bishop’s second square [17.
K f 2].
If Black were to take the opposing rook’s pawn with his pawn [17...gxh4], 
White would move the rook to the opposing knight’s second square [18.
R g 7].
If Black plays his queen’s bishop to the king’s third square [18...Be6], 
White plays his queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [19.Bg5].
If Black moves the king’s rook to the king’s bishop’s square [19...Rf8], 
White will move the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [20.
Nd2].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [20...
Nd7], White will move the queen’s rook to the king’s square [21.Re1], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing bishop.
If Black were to move the bishop to the second square of his king’s bishop 
[21...Bf7] to avoid checkmate, White would move the queen’s rook to the 
opposing king’s second square [22.Re7].
In this way, Black has, perforce, lost the game, because if Black moves 
the bishop to the king’s square [22...Be8], White will move the pawn one 
square [23.f7], placing it in position to take the aforementioned bishop, 
which is hopelessly lost.
chapter 19
Another way to arrange the game,  
beginning with the same kings’ pawns and  
the king’s bishop’s pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black does likewise [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn 
as far as it can go [2.f4].

158 BooK II
If Black were not to capture the king’s bishop’s pawn, but moved the 
king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2...Nf6] in order to take the 
opposing king’s pawn, White could capture the king’s pawn with the 
pawn of his bishop [3.fxe5], and if Black captured the king’s pawn with 
his knight [3...Nxe4], White could move the king’s knight to his bishop’s 
third square, thus arranging his game well [4.Nf3].
If White did not want to play this way, however, it could move the queen’s 
knight to his bishop’s third square [3.Nc3], protecting the king’s pawn.
If Black were to take the bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn [3...exf4], 
White would move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [4.d4].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [4...Bb4], placing it in position to capture the aforemen-
tioned knight, White will move the king’s bishop to his queen’s third 
square [5.Bd3], protecting the king’s pawn.
If Black moved his queen to the second square of his king to take the 
king’s pawn [5...Qe7], White would protect the pawn, moving the queen 
to his king’s second square [6.Qe2].
If Black were to move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [6...
Nc6], placing it in position to capture the opposing queen’s pawn, White 
would protect that pawn, moving the king’s knight to the bishop’s third 
s q u a re   [7. Nf 3].
If Black moves his king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [7...g5], White 
will move the queen’s pawn one square forward [8.d5], placing it in posi-
tion to take the opposing queen’s knight.
If Black moves the aforementioned knight to his king’s fourth square 
[8...Ne5], White will capture the knight’s pawn with his king’s knight 
[ 9. Nx g 5].
If Black were to take the opposing queen’s pawn with his king’s knight 
[9...Nxd5], White would capture the king’s knight with the king’s pawn 
[10.exd5].

 BooK II                                                  159
If Black took the opposing king’s knight with his queen [10...Qxg5], 
White would move the king’s knight’s pawn one square [11.g3].
If Black moves his king to the square of his queen [11...Kd8], White will 
take the king’s pawn with the queen’s bishop [12.Bxf4].
If Black took the king’s bishop with his knight, giving check [12...Nxd3+], 
White would take the knight with his queen [13.Qxd3].
If Black were to give check with his king’s rook, moving to his own king’s 
square [13...Re8+], White would move the king to his queen’s second 
square [14.Kd2].
If Black moves his queen to the third square of his king’s knight [14...
Q g6], in order to exchange queens, White will move the queen’s rook to 
the king’s square [15.Re1].
If Black were to take the queen with his queen [15...Qxd3+], White would 
capture the queen with his king [16.Kxd3].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [16...d6], White will take the 
opposing rook with his rook, giving check [17.R xe8+].
If Black captures the rook with his king [17...Kxe8], White will give 
check with the other rook from the king’s square [18.Re1+].
If Black moves the king to the queen’s second square [18...Kd7], White will 
move his bishop to the fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [19.Bg5].
In this way, White will win the game.
Note. The best move Black could make after exchanging his queen is not 
to move the queen’s pawn, but first to move the king’s bishop to the king’s 
second square [16.Be7] so that the opposing bishop could not move to 
the fourth square of the king’s knight, which, as we have said, is the most 
troublesome move.
If White moves the queen’s rook to the king’s third square [17.Re3] in 
order to double the rooks, Black will be able to defend itself.20
20. Doubled rooks occur when both rooks are on the same rank or file and not separated 
by another piece or a pawn.

160 BooK II
If White takes the bishop with his rook [17.R xe7], however, Black would 
capture the rook with his rook [17...R xe7].
If White, in order to pin Black’s rook, moves the bishop to the fourth 
square of the opposing king’s knight [18.Bg5], Black will move the king to 
his own square [18...Ke8].
This is the best he can do, as White, knowing how to play, will win by 
force, taking the rook with his bishop [19.Bxe7] and then giving check 
with his rook from the king’s square [20.Re1+],21 then playing according 
to how the opponent plays. Because the moves are evident even to an av-
erage player, I will not discuss this game anymore.
chapter 20
Another way to arrange the game,  
beginning similarly
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black moves the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [2...Nf6], 
White will move the queen’s knight to his bishop’s third square [3.Nc3].
If Black took the bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn [3...exf4], White 
would move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [4.d4].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [4...Bb4], attacking the knight, White will move the 
king’s bishop to the queen’s third square [5.Bd3], protecting the king’s 
pawn.
If Black moves the queen to the king’s second square [5...Qe7], White 
will move his queen to the king’s second square [6.Qe2].
21. Before the rook places the king in check, the king captures the bishop [Kxe7].

 BooK II                                                  161
If Black moves the queen’s knight to his bishop’s third square [6...Nc6], 
placing it in position to take the opposing queen’s pawn, White will not 
protect the queen’s pawn, as we said in the game before this one, but, in-
stead, it will move the king’s pawn one square forward [7.e5], placing it in 
position to capture the opposing king’s knight.
If Black were to take the queen’s pawn with his queen’s knight [7...Nxd4], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing queen, White would cap-
ture the opposing king’s knight with the king’s pawn [8.exf6].
If Black took the queen with his knight [8...Nxe2], White would capture 
the opposing queen with his pawn [9.fxe7].
If Black took the queen’s knight with his knight [9...Nxc3], White would 
move the queen’s rook’s pawn one square [10.a3], placing it in position to 
take the opposing bishop.
If Black withdrew the bishop to his rook’s fourth square [10...Ba5], White 
would move the queen’s bishop to the queen’s second square [11.Bd2], 
thus winning a piece.
But if Black were not to capture the queen’s pawn with his queen’s knight, 
but first moved the king’s knight to the fourth square of his queen [7...
Nd5], placing it in position to take the opposing queen’s knight, which 
is pinned by the bishop, White would move the queen’s bishop to the 
queen’s second square [8.Bd2].
If  Black  were  to  take  the  queen’s  pawn  with  his  queen’s  knight  [8...
Nxd4], White would capture the opposing king’s knight with his knight 
[9.Nxd5], placing it in position to take the opposing queen.
If Black were to give check with his queen from the opposing rook’s 
fourth square [9...Qh4+], White would block the king with the king’s 
knight’s pawn [10.g3].
If Black took the king’s knight’s pawn with his pawn [10...fxg3], White 
would move the queen to the second square of the king’s knight [11.Q g2].
If  Black  were  to  take  the  rook’s  pawn,  giving  discovered  check  [11...
gxh2+], White would move the king to his bishop’s square [12.Kf1].

162 BooK II
If Black took the bishop with his bishop [12...Bxd2], White would take 
the pawn with his rook [13.R xh2], placing it in position to capture the 
opposing queen.
If Black flees with his queen, White would capture the bishop with his 
queen, thus winning a piece.
If Black, before it takes the bishop, took the knight with his pawn [12...
hxg1Q+], making it a queen and giving check, White would take the 
pawn with his queen [13.Qxg1], leaving the rook discovered and in posi-
tion to capture the opposing queen.
In this way, Black has perforce lost the game.
chapter 21
Another way to arrange the game,  
beginning with the same kings’ pawns  
and the king’s bishop’s pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves likewise [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn 
as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [2...d6], White will move the 
king’s bishop to the fourth square of his queen’s bishop [3.Bc4].
If Black were to take the king’s bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn [3...
exf4], White would move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [4.d4].
If Black were to give check with his queen from the opposing rook’s 
fourth square [4...Qh4+], White would move the king to the bishop’s 
s q u a re   [ 5 . K f 1].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [5...Bg4], placing it in position to capture the queen, White 
will move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [6.Nf3], protect-
ing his queen and positioning himself to take the opposing queen.

 BooK II                                                  163
If  Black  took  the  aforementioned  knight  with  his  bishop  [6...Bxf3],  
White would take the bishop with his queen [7.Qxf3].
If Black moves the king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [7...g5] to pro-
tect the pawn, White will move the queen to his knight’s third square 
[8.Qb3] in order to capture the opposing queen’s knight’s pawn or the 
king’s bishop’s pawn.
If Black moves the king, leaping to the queen’s bishop’s square [8...Kc8], 
White  will  capture  the  king’s  bishop’s  pawn  with  his  king’s  bishop  
[ 9. Bx f 7].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [9...Nf6], 
White will give check with his queen from the opposing king’s third 
square [10.Qe6+].
If Black moves the king to his queen’s square [10...Kd8] or protects it 
by moving the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [10...Nd7], 
White will move the king’s pawn one square forward [11.e5], placing it in 
position to capture the opposing king’s knight.
This way, White will have won the game irreversibly.
chapt
er 22
Another way to arrange  
the game, beginning similarly with the 
aforementioned pawns
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves likewise [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn 
as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black were to take this pawn [2...exf4], White would move the king’s 
bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [3.Bc4].
If Black were to give check with the queen from the fourth square of the 
opposing rook [3...Qh4+], White would move the king to his bishop’s 
square [4.Kf1].

164 BooK II
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [4...d6], White will move the 
king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [5.Nf3], placing it in position to 
capture the opposing queen.
If Black moves the queen to the fourth square of the opposing king’s 
knight [5...Q g4], White will move the king to the bishop’s second square 
[6. K f 2] .
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [6...Nf6], 
placing it in position to take the opposing king’s pawn, White will move 
the rook to his king’s square [7.Re1], protecting the pawn.
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will arrange his game well even 
if it has one less pawn, because Black, in protecting the pawn, will disor-
ganize his game.
chapter 23
Another way to arrange the game, beginning  
with the same pawns
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn in similar fashion [1...e5], White will 
move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black took the bishop’s king’s pawn [2...exf4], White would move the 
king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [3.Bc4].
If Black were to give check with his queen from the opposing rook’s 
fourth square [3...Qh4+], White would move the king to the bishop’s 
square [4.Kf1].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of his queen’s bish-
op [4...Bc5], White will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [5.d4], 
placing it in position it to capture the bishop.
If Black were to withdraw the bishop to his queen’s knight’s third square 
[5...Bb6], White would move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third 
square [6.Nf3], placing it in position to capture the opposing queen.

 BooK II                                                 165
If Black moves the queen to the fourth square of the opposing king’s 
knight [6...Q g4], White will take the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn with 
his bishop, giving check [7.Bxf7+].
If Black took the bishop with his king [7...Kxf7], White would give check 
with his knight from the fourth square of the opposing king [8.Ne5+], 
placing it in position to take the queen as well.
If Black does not move the queen to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight, but, first, moves it to the third square of his king’s bish-
op [6...Qf6], White will move the king’s pawn one square forward [7.e5], 
placing it in position to take the queen.
If Black moves the queen to his bishop’s third square [7...Qc6], placing it 
in position to capture the opposing king’s bishop, White will move his 
queen to the king’s second square [8.Qe2], protecting the bishop.
In this way, White will recover his pawn and have an excellent game.
But if Black does not move the queen to his bishop’s third square, but, 
instead, moves it to the fourth square of the king’s bishop [7...Qf5], pro-
tecting the pawn, White will move the king’s bishop to his queen’s third 
square [8.Bd3], placing it in position to capture the opposing queen.
If Black still wants to protect the pawn, it will move the queen to the 
fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [8...Q g4]. White will move 
the pawn of his king’s rook one square [9.h3], placing it in position to 
take the queen.
If Black were to move the queen to the third square of the aforemen-
tioned knight [9...Q g3] in order to protect the pawn, White would move 
the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [10.Nc3].
In this way, White will have won the queen and the game, moving lat-
er the aforementioned knight to either the king’s second or the fourth 
square, according to how the opponent plays.

166 BooK II
chapter 24
Another way to arrange  
the game, beginning similarly with the 
aforementioned pawns
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black were to take the king’s bishop’s pawn [2...exf4], White would 
move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of his queen’s bishop [3.Bc4].
If Black were to give check with the queen from the fourth square of the 
opposing king’s rook [3...Qh4+], White would move the king to the bish-
op’s square [4.Kf1].
If Black moves the king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [4...g5], White 
will move the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [5.Nf3], placing it 
in position to capture the opposing queen.
If Black moves the queen to the fourth square of the king’s rook [5...Qh5], 
White will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [6.d4].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [6...Nf6], 
White will move the queen to the king’s second square [7.Qe2].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to his bishop’s third square [7...Nc6], 
White will move the king’s pawn one square forward [8.e5], placing it in 
position to capture the opposing king’s knight. If Black were to move it 
to the fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [8...Ng4], White will 
move the queen’s knight to his bishop’s third square [9.Nc3].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the king’s second square [9...Be7], 
White will move the queen’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen [10.Nd5].

 BooK II                                                 167
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the queen’s square [10...Bd8] to defend 
against the check and the attack on the rook by the opposing knight,22 
White will move his king’s rook’s pawn one square [11.h3], placing it in 
position to capture the knight.
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the fourth square of his rook [11...
Na5] in order to capture the opposing king’s bishop, which seems to be 
a good move, White will move the king to his knight’s square [12.Kg1].
If Black moves the king’s knight, so as not to lose it and the entire game, 
to the opposing king’s third square [12...Ne3], White will have an excel-
lent game, because he will collect his pawn and be left with the better 
arranged game and, knowing how to play, will defeat his enemy.
chapter 25
Another way to arrange the game, beginning  
similarly with the same pawns
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black does likewise [1...e5], White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn 
as far as it can go [2.f4].
If Black took the king’s bishop’s pawn [2...exf4], White would move the 
king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [3.Bc4].
If Black were to give check with his queen from the fourth square of the 
opposing rook [3...Qh4+], White would move the king to his bishop’s 
square [4.Kf1].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [4...Nf6], 
White will move the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [5.Nf3], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing queen.
If Black moves the queen to the fourth square of the king’s rook [5...Qh5], 
White will move the queen to his king’s second square [6.Qe2].
22. López describes a “fork” here: If White’s queen’s knight were to move to c7, it could 
offer a simultaneous attack on Black ’s king and his queen’s rook.

168 BooK II
If Black moved the king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [6...g5], White 
would not move the knight to the fourth square of the opposing king 
[7.Ne5], even though it seems like a good move, because Black would ex-
change his queen [7...Qxe2+]. White capturing the queen with his king 
[8.Kxe2], Black would move the queen’s pawn one square [8...d6], placing 
it in position to take the knight.
If White were to take the king’s bishop’s pawn with the knight [9.Nxf7], 
Black would move the same queen’s pawn another square [9...d5], placing 
it in position to capture the opposing bishop, winning a piece, because if 
White took the rook with his knight, Black would take the bishop with 
his pawn, leaving the knight hopelessly lost.
It is for this reason that I said earlier that White would not move the 
knight to the opposing king’s fourth square, even though it seemed like 
a good move. Instead, it will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go 
[7. d 4].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [7...d6], White will move the 
king’s pawn one square forward [8.e5], placing it in position to capture 
the opposing king’s knight.
If Black were to take the pawn with his queen’s pawn [8...dxe5], White 
would capture the queen’s pawn with his queen, giving check [9.Qxe5+].
Then, White will win a pawn, of the opposing king’s knight or of the 
opposing queen’s bishop, depending on how the enemy plays. In this 
way, White will have the better game, and he will defeat [the opponent], 
knowing how to play.
chapt
er 26
Another way for Black to arrange the game  
against the king’s bishop’s pawn’s attack
White will move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4]. Black, likewise 
[1...e5].

 BooK II                                                 169
If White moves the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2.f4], Black 
will move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop 
[2...Bc5], because White will not dare to take the king’s pawn since Black 
would give check with the queen and position himself to win the game.23
White will not dare to capture the king’s pawn, therefore, first moving 
the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [3.Nf3]. Black will move the 
queen’s pawn one square [3...d6].
If White were to take the king’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn [4.fxe5], 
however, Black would capture the bishop’s pawn with his queen’s pawn 
[4 ... d xe5].
If White took the queen’s pawn with his knight [5.Nxe5], Black would 
give check with his queen from the fourth square of the opposing rook 
[ 5 ...Q h 4+].
If White protects the king with the knight’s pawn to avoid checkmate 
[6.g3], Black will take the king’s pawn with the queen, giving check again 
[6...Q x e 4+] .
If White protects the king with his queen [7.Qe2], Black will capture the 
rook with his queen [7...Qxh1].
If White were to give discovered check, moving the knight to the third 
square of the opposing king’s knight [8.Ng6+], Black would protect his 
king with the king’s knight [8...Ne7].
If White took the rook with his knight [9.Nxh8], Black would move the 
queen’s bishop to the third square of the opposing rook [9...Bh3] and ex-
change the queen and the bishop.24 Black will leap to his knight’s square 
and soon thereafter capture the knight [Kxh8], and eventually win the 
game.
23. Today, this opening sequence where Black does not accept White’s pawn sacrifice is 
known as the King’s Gambit Declined. Instead of capturing the king’s bishop’s pawn with 
the king’s pawn, Black could capture the king’s knight with his king’s bishop [Bxg1], unless 
White moves the knight to f3.
24. In order to protect the king, White will not move either the bishop [f1] or the queen 
[e2]. After White makes another move, Black can capture the bishop with his queen’s bishop 
[Bxf1]. Then, White will take the bishop with his queen [Qxf1]. Black will capture the queen 
with his queen [Qxf1], and White will capture the queen with his king [Kxf1].

170 BooK II
Note. If, at the beginning, so as not to lose the game, White avoided 
capturing the king’s pawn, as we have said, but, first, moved the king’s 
bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [4.Bc4], Black would 
have moved the queen to the king’s second square [4...Qe7], protecting 
the pawn.
If White moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [5.Ng5], placing it in position to capture the bishop’s pawn, 
Black will move the king’s knight to the rook’s third square [5...Nh6], 
protecting the pawn.
If White moves the queen to the opposing rook’s fourth square [6.Qh5], 
Black will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [6...Bg4], in position to take the opposing queen.
If White took the bishop’s pawn with his bishop, giving check [7.Bxf7+], 
a move that will look good to some people, Black would take the afore-
mentioned bishop with his queen [7...Qxf7], winning a piece, because if 
White were to take the queen with his knight [8.Nxf7], Black would cap-
ture the opposing queen with his bishop [8...Bxh5].
If White were to capture the rook with his knight [9.Nxh8], the knight 
would be lost. In this way, Black would have won a bishop and a knight 
in exchange for a pawn and a rook, respectively, emerging with the better 
game because it has one more piece.
If White did not want to lose the piece, and moved his queen to the 
fourth square of his king’s rook [7.Qh4], Black would take the bishop’s 
pawn with his king’s pawn [7...exf4]. Then, he would move the pawn of 
his king’s bishop one square [8...f6], placing it in position to capture the 
opposing knight.
In this way, Black will have arranged his game well, based on how the 
opponent played.

 BooK II                                                  171
chapter 27
Another way for Black to arrange the game  
against the king’s bishop’s pawn’s attack
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves likewise [1...e5], and White moves the king’s bishop’s 
pawn as far as it can go [2.f4], Black will capture the king’s bishop’s pawn 
[2...exf4].
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3.Bc4], Black will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [3...c6].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [4.Nf3] or 
the queen’s pawn as far as it can go, Black will move the queen’s pawn as 
far as it can go [4...d5], placing it in position to take the opposing bishop.
If White took the queen’s pawn with his king’s pawn [5.exd5], Black 
would take the pawn with the pawn of his queen’s bishop [5...cxd5].
If White were to give check with the aforementioned bishop [6.Bb5+], 
Black would protect the king, moving the queen’s knight to the bishop’s 
third square [6...Nc6].
In this way, Black would be able to arrange his game well, depending 
on how the enemy plays: because if White had moved the queen’s pawn 
[4.d4], as we have said, and took the king’s pawn with the queen’s bishop 
[7.Bxf4], Black would give check with his queen from the rook’s fourth 
s q u a r e   [7...Q a5+] .
If White blocked by moving the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third 
square [8.Nc3] to protect his king’s bishop, Black would move the king’s 
bishop against said knight [8...Bb4].
If White were to take the opposing queen’s knight with his bishop, giving 
check [9.Bxc6+], Black would capture the bishop with his knight’s pawn 
[ 9...bxc6].

172 BooK II
In this way, Black will be able to connect his pawns and arrange his game 
well, according to the opponent’s moves.25
chapter 28
Another way for Black to arrange the game  
against the king’s bishop’s pawn’s attack
White will move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4], and Black will 
move the king’s pawn similarly [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2.f4], Black 
will capture the king’s bishop’s pawn [2...exf4].
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3.Bc4], Black will move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go 
[3...f5].
If White were to take the king’s bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn 
[4.exf5], Black would give check with his queen from the fourth square of 
the opposing king’s rook [4...Qh4+].
If White moves the king to the bishop’s square [5.Kf1], which is the best 
move possible, Black will move the king’s pawn one square forward [5...
f3], discovering his queen against the opposing king’s bishop.
If White were to protect his bishop or take the king’s knight with it 
[6.Bxg8], Black would capture the opposing king’s knight’s pawn with his 
pawn, giving check [6...fxg2+].
If White captures the pawn with his king [7.Kxg2], Black will take the 
bishop with his rook [7...R xg8].
In this way, White will be left disorganized, and Black, knowing how to 
play, will win easily.
25. The player connects pawns when there are two or more pawns of the same color on 
adjacent files. The connected pawns, which are c6 and d5 in this game, can protect each oth-
er. This observation displays a sophisticated positional sense on L
ópez’s part and an acute 
understanding of the strategic possibilities that characterize the game of chess.

 BooK II                                                  173
Note. If when Black moved the king’s bishop’s pawn, as we have said, 
White, before capturing the pawn, had taken with his bishop the oppos-
ing king’s knight [4.Bxg8], Black, before capturing the bishop, would give 
check with his queen from the opposing rook’s fourth square [4...Qh4+], 
and would then play accordingly, depending on how his enemy played.
If White moved the king to the bishop’s square [5.Kf1], then Black would 
take the bishop with his rook [5...R xg8] and have the better game, and 
this suffices to defend the aforementioned pawn.
chapter 29
Another way to arrange the game, beginning  
with the player whose first move is the king’s pawn; 
the opponent’s is the queen’s pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].26
If Black moves the queen’s pawn [1...d5], White will be able to advance 
the king’s pawn another square, which is not a bad move.
In my opinion, however, a better move for White would be to capture 
the opposing pawn, because it wins a move against the enemy [2.exd5]. 
If Black were to take the king’s pawn with his queen [2...Qxd5], White 
would move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [3.Nc3], plac-
ing it in position to take the opposing queen.
If Black were to return the queen to her square [3...Qd8], White would 
move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [4.d4].
In this way, White will advance his pieces cautiously on the enemy and 
arrange his game well, and this is enough explanation for this way to 
start. With this information, we conclude the ways to arrange a game 
without advantage, beginning with the king’s pawn and without addi-
tional possibilities. Now, we will discuss other ways that Damiano sets 
26. Later this variation became known as the Center Counter Game or, in modern 
times, the Scandinavian Defense.

174 BooK II
forth in his book, demonstrating their imperfections and errors, offering 
alternatives for the attacker and defender both as needed. We will de-
scribe and treat them as we have the others, so that they are better un-
derstood, and not confusingly as does Damiano, who says, “if you were 
to move and if he played this move if not if White moved this way, Black 
would move this other way.” The way we describe it seems to be a clearer 
and more transparent way for players and beginners.

BOOK III



 177
chapter 1
Beginning to arrange the game,  
according to Damiano
The first way to begin to play is with the king’s pawn.
The second is beginning with the queen’s pawn.
The first is better in my judgment, because it is useful to know how to 
begin with the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [2.Nf3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2...Nf6], 
White will capture the king’s pawn with his knight [3.Nxe5].1
If  Black  were  to  take  the  opposing  king’s  pawn  with  his  knight  [3...
Nxe4], White would move the queen to the king’s second square [4.Qe2].
If Black were to withdraw the knight in order not to lose it [4...Nf6], 
White would give a discovered check with his queen, moving the knight 
to the third square of the opposing queen’s bishop [5.Nc6+].
But if Black did not withdraw the knight but instead moved the queen 
to the king’s second square [4...Qe7], placing it in position to capture the 
opposing knight, White would take the knight with his queen [5.Qxe4].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [5...d6], placing it in position 
to capture the opposing knight, White will not move the knight, because 
he would lose his queen. Instead, White will move the queen’s pawn as 
far as it can go [6.d4].
If Black moves the king’s bishop’s pawn one square [6...f6], White will 
move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [7.f4].
1. Today, this opening is known in English-speaking countries as the Petrov Defense 
(and in some languages, as the Russian Game).

178 BooK III
If Black took the knight with the queen’s pawn [7...dxe5], White would 
take the queen’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [8.dxe5].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [8...Nd7], 
White will move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [9.Nc3], 
protecting the queen.
If Black took the pawn with his own pawn [9...fxe5], White would move 
the queen’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing queen [10.Nd5], 
placing it in position to take the queen.
If Black moves the queen to the queen’s third square [10...Qd6], White 
will capture the pawn with his pawn [11.fxe5], placing it in position to 
take the queen.
If Black were to take the pawn with his knight [11...Nxe5], White would 
move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bishop [12.Bf4] 
against the knight, winning it by force.
If Black does not take the pawn with his knight, he will lose a pawn. If 
Black captures the pawn with the queen [11...Qxe5], White will exchange 
his queen [12.Qxe5] for the opposing queen [12...Nxe5].
Then, White will fork with the knight, giving check and threatening the 
rook after it captures the bishop’s pawn [13.Nxc7+].
Note. If Black does not capture the pawn,2 but moves the queen to the 
bishop’s third square [11...Qc6], White will move the king’s bishop to the 
opposing queen’s knight’s fourth square [12.Bb5], placing it in position to 
take the queen.
If Black took the bishop with his queen [12...Qxb5], White will fork with 
the knight, giving check and threatening the queen after capturing the 
bishop’s pawn [13.Nxc7+].
If Black does not capture the bishop, but, instead, moves the queen to the 
bishop’s fourth square [12...Qc5], White will move the queen’s bishop to 
the king’s third square [13.Be3], placing it in position to take the oppos-
2. That is, instead of either Nxe5 or Qxe5.

 BooK III                                                 179
ing queen, winning it because it is not able to escape. Neither can it give 
check from the rook’s fourth square, as Damiano says, unless it leaps over 
the opposing bishop.3
If, when we said Black moved the queen to the bishop’s third square, it 
had moved it to the fourth square [11...Qc5] instead, White would have 
moved the queen’s bishop to the king’s third square [12.Be3], placing it in 
position to capture queen.
If Black were to give check with his queen from the rook’s fourth square 
[12...Qa5+], White would block it, moving the bishop to the queen’s sec-
ond square [13.Bd2].
If Black were to return his queen to the bishop’s fourth square [13...Qc5], 
White would move the queen’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [14.b4], 
placing it in position to capture the queen.
If Black moves the queen to the bishop’s third square [14...Qc6], White 
will move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing queen’s 
knight [15.Bb5], placing it in position to capture the queen.
If Black were to take the bishop, it would lose the queen, White giving 
check with the knight and threatening the queen, as we have said.
But if Black does not capture the bishop, but, instead, moves the queen to 
the third square of the king’s knight [15...Q g6], White would exchange 
the queen [16.Qxg6+] and then take the queen’s bishop’s pawn with his 
knight, giving check [17.Nxc7+] and threatening the rook.
In this way, White will have won the game. This manner of playing is 
Damiano’s teaching, although in different words.
Note. What a gallant and beautiful principle for starting is the aforemen-
tioned. Everyone who knows how to play a little will appreciate it very 
well, because it is good for anyone establishing precepts for demonstrat-
ing and organizing games not only to show how to attack, but also how 
to defend. The player desires, if not the most effective way, then at least 
3. López notes in the margin: “Oversight by Damiano.”

180 BooK III
one that seems to be good. Many players would play this way, which is in 
contrast to Damiano, who demonstrates ways that never have or will be 
played. Consequently, he is known by all for his sad way of playing.
Note: Furthermore, if Black captures the pawn with his knight, and 
White moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bishop, 
the knight is not necessarily lost, as Damiano says, because Black will be 
able to move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [12...c6], placing it in 
position to capture the opposing knight.
If White were to withdraw the aforementioned knight to the third square 
of the queen’s bishop, that would be the best move, because if he played 
it someplace else, Black would give check with his queen from the fourth 
square of the opposing queen. The queens would be exchanged and Black 
would save his knight, but if White moves the aforementioned knight, as 
it has been said, to the third square of the queen’s bishop [13.Nc3], Black 
would leap with his king to the bishop’s third square [13...Kf6] to protect 
his knight.
In this way, Black, knowing how to play, will defend his knight, even if it 
is not a very good game, given that the king is out in the open field. One 
will risk everything in order not to lose a piece, all the more so when it is 
evident that the game is not lost yet.
If White knows how to attack in the game as badly as Black, following 
Damiano’s teaching, knows how to defend, Black will save the knight 
and the game. In order not to dwell on this subject anymore, I will return 
to the principle of this way of playing, organizing well what both sides 
can do, beginning the game in the following way.

 BooK III                                                 181
chapter 2
Beginning to play, according to  
Damiano’s first way
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black does no more and no less [1...e5].
White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2...Nf6], 
White will take the opposing king’s pawn with his knight [3.Nxe5].
If Black took similarly the opposing king’s pawn with his knight [3...
Nxe4], White would move the queen to the king’s second square [4.Qe2], 
placing it in position to take the knight.
If Black moves his queen to the king’s second square [4...Qe7], White 
will capture the knight with his queen [5.Qxe4].
If Black advances the queen’s pawn one square [5...d6], placing it in posi-
tion to take the knight, White will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can 
g o   [6. d 4] .
If Black moves the king’s bishop’s pawn one square [6...f6], placing it in 
position to capture the knight, White will move the king’s bishop’s pawn 
as far as it can go [7.f4].
If Black took the knight with the queen’s pawn [7...dxe5], White will 
take the pawn with the queen’s pawn [8.dxe5].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [8...Nd7], 
White will move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [9.Nc3].
If Black took the queen’s pawn with the bishop’s pawn [9...fxe5], White 
will move the knight to the fourth square of the opposing queen [10.
Nd5], placing it in position to take the queen.

182 BooK III
If Black moves the knight to the third square of the king’s bishop [10...
Nf6], it will be in position to attack the enemy’s queen and knight.
If White were to give check with the queen from the rook’s fourth square 
[11.Qa4], it would seem to be a good move, and it is, because if Black pro-
tected the king with the queen’s bishop from the queen’s second square 
[11...Bd7], placing the bishop in a position to capture the opposing queen, 
White would capture the opposing queen with his knight [12.Nxe7]. 
Thus, he would win the game, because if Black captures the opposing 
queen with his bishop [12...Bxa4], White will capture the knight with his 
king’s pawn, protecting the knight and winning a piece.4
chapter 3
Another way to arrange the game, beginning  
with Damiano’s same game
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4], and Black also 
[1...e5].
White will move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3].
If Black plays likewise [2...Nf6], White will take the opposing king’s 
pawn with his knight [3.Nxe5].
If Black took the enemy’s pawn with his knight [3...Nxe4], White would 
move the queen to the king’s second square [4.Qe2].
If Black moves his queen to the king’s second square [4...Qe7], White 
will take the knight with his queen [5.Qxe4].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [5...d6], placing it in position 
to capture the opposing knight, White will move the queen’s pawn as far 
as it can go [6.d4].
4. White would capture the knight not with the king’s pawn, which Black captured 
in move 3, but with the bishop’s pawn. First, White would capture the bishop’s pawn with 
his bishop’s pawn [13.fxe5]. Then, if Black did not move the knight, White would capture it 
with his bishop’s pawn [14.exf3].

 BooK III                                                 183
If Black moves the king’s bishop’s pawn one square [6...f6], placing it in 
position to take the same knight, White will move the king’s bishop’s 
pawn as far as it can go [7.f4].
If Black took the knight with the queen’s pawn [7...dxe5], White would 
take the queen’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [8.dxe5].
If Black took the queen’s pawn with the bishop’s pawn [8...fxe5] and 
White were to take the bishop’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn [9.fxe5], 
Black would move the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square in or-
der to capture the pawn [9...Nd7].
If White moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bish-
op [10.Bf4], protecting the pawn, Black will advance the king’s knight’s 
pawn as far as it can go [10...g5], placing it in position to capture the 
bishop.
If White were to withdraw the bishop to the third square of the king’s 
knight [11.Bg3], Black would move the king’s bishop to the knight’s sec-
ond square [11...Bg7].
In this way, Black will have won the pawn by force, although the game is 
left somewhat disorganized.
Note. If, when White captured the bishop’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn, 
the queen captured the bishop’s pawn instead [9.Qxe5], it would be a bet-
ter move, because it would leave White with one more pawn.
If Black were to exchange the queen [9...Qxe5], White would take the 
queen with the bishop’s pawn [10.fxe5].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bish-
op [10...Bf5], placing it in position to take the opposing queen’s bishop’s 
pawn, White will push the aforementioned pawn one square [11.c3].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [11...Nd7], 
White will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s 
bishop to protect the pawn [12.Bf4].

184 BooK III
White should not move the king’s bishop to the queen’s third square [11.
Bd3] to exchange bishops [11...Bxd3] and to connect the pawns, because, 
even though it seems like a good move, it is not, for Black would ex-
change, and, after White captured with his pawn [12.cxd3], Black would 
move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [12...Nc6], placing it 
in position to capture the pawn that is on his king’s fourth square.
This is why we said that playing the king’s bishop to the queen’s third 
square would not be a good move. Instead, it would be more advisable to 
move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square.
If White moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bish-
op [13.Bf4], Black will move the queen’s rook to the queen’s square [13...
Rd8], placing it in position to capture the other pawn.
If White moves the king to protect the pawn wherever it wants [14.Ke2], 
it will not be able to protect it because Black will move the knight to the 
fourth square of the opposing queen’s knight [14...Nb4].
In this way, Black will win the pawn, or the queen’s rook, or the bishop, 
according to how White moved his king.
Consequently, White, knowing how to play, will keep his additional 
pawn and will win the game.
If the game were played in the Italian style that permits leaping, it would 
not be possible to protect the pawn if Black knows how to play.5
5. Chess historian and scholar Jorge Amador observes: “I suspect that here he means 
the king’s leap, to e6 in this case, putting a second attacker on the e5-pawn and White has 
no way to add defenders. But it’s odd that he would stop to point this out, since thus far in 
the book the king’s leap has always been an option and indeed it’s been used several times” 
( J. Amador, personal communication, September 23, 2018).

 BooK III                                                 185
chapter 4
Another way to arrange the game, beginning  
with Damiano’s same game
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black moves likewise [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], 
Black  will  also  move  the  king’s  knight  to  the  bishop’s  third  square  
[2 ... Nf6].
If White took the opposing king’s pawn with his knight [3.Nxe5], Black 
would move the queen to the king’s second square [3...Qe7], placing it in 
position to take the knight.
If White moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [4.d4] to protect the 
knight, Black will move the queen’s pawn one square [4...d6], placing it 
in position to capture the aforementioned knight.
If White were to withdraw the knight, moving it to the third square of 
the king’s bishop [5.Nf3], Black would take the opposing king’s pawn 
with his queen, giving check [5...Qxe4+].
If White protects the king, moving the king’s bishop to the king’s second 
square [6.Be2], Black will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square 
of the king’s bishop [6...Bf5], placing it in position to take the opposing 
queen’s bishop’s pawn.
If White were to move this pawn one square [7.c3], Black would move the 
queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [7...Nd7].
If White moves the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [8.Nd2], 
placing it in position to take the opposing queen, Black will move the 
queen to the second square of the opposing queen’s bishop [8...Qc2].
In this way, it will exchange his queen with the opponent’s queen by 
force, and will be able to arrange his game well because the enemy will 
not have an advantage.

186 BooK III
This way of playing, knowing how to make corrections, makes it possible 
to transform a bad beginning into a good game. It is not possible to make 
corrections, however, with the ones Damiano demonstrates. This is all we 
need to say for players’ benefit about Damiano’s first way of playing.
chapt
er 5
Beginning to arrange the game, according  
to Damiano’s second way
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black makes the same move [1...e5].
White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3] to cap-
ture the pawn.
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2...Nc6] 
to protect the pawn [e5], White will move the king’s bishop to the fourth 
square of the queen’s bishop [3.Bc4].
If Black moved the king’s bishop to the queen’s bishop’s fourth square 
[3...Bc5], White would move the queen’s pawn one square, or indeed 
move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4.c3], so that we do not stray 
from what Damiano says.
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [4...Nf6], 
White  will  move  the  queen’s  pawn  one  square  [5.d3],  protecting  the  
pawn.
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [5...d6], White will move the 
king’s rook to the bishop’s square [6.Rf1].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [6...Bg4], placing it in position to take the knight, White 
will move the queen to the knight’s third square [7.Qb3]. White will win 
a pawn, either the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn, or the queen’s knight’s 
pawn.

 BooK III                                                 187
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the rook’s fourth square [7...Na5] to 
capture the queen or the bishop, White will take the king’s bishop’s pawn 
with his bishop, giving check [8.Bxf7+]. Black will move his king to its 
bishop’s square [8...Kf8]. Then, White will move the queen to the rook’s 
fourth square [9.Qa4].
If Black took the bishop with his king [9...Kxf7], White would take the 
knight with his queen [10.Qxa5].
Note. If Black did not capture the bishop, but first moved the queen’s 
bishop’s pawn one square [9...c6], White would move the queen’s knight’s 
pawn as far as it can go [10.b4], because if White moved the bishop, it 
would lose it, or, even worse, the queen.
And so, in said manner White will have won a pawn, because if Black 
took the bishop with the king [10...Kxf7], White would take the knight 
with his queen [11.Qxa5].
If Black were to exchange queens [11...Qxa5], [White] should not be 
afraid to double the pawns [12.bxa5] because even though doubled, it is 
still one more pawn.
All of what has been said is Damiano’s doctrine, although not expressed 
in these words.
Note. To tell the truth, I do not know how much Damiano has won play-
ing this way, because in order to win the aforementioned pawn, he will 
have doubled pawns two times, to wit, the queen’s knight’s pawn and the 
king’s knight’s pawn after Black captures the knight with his bishop [12...
Bx f 3].
In this way, Black, knowing how to play, has a good game, especially if 
Black did not exchange the queen when White captured the knight with 
his queen. Black would first move the king’s bishop to his queen’s knight’s 
third square [11...Bb6], placing it in position to capture the opposing 
queen. Then, it would take the opposing king’s knight with the queen’s 
bishop [12...Bxf3].

188 BooK III
In this way, White will be disorganized and disjointed on both sides [of-
fense and defense], giving his enemy an opening to confuse him and win 
the game.
Since this manner of playing is Damiano’s most effective way to demon-
strate how to play, it is extremely bad for very good players, and even 
worse for beginners.
Since Damiano has not followed the general rules in this game, it is ad-
visable to follow the twelfth rule: not to double the pawns.6 Although 
it seems that Damiano’s purpose was to win a pawn, it disorganized his 
game.
According to the universal rules he established, Damiano contradicted 
himself in two ways.7 The first, the king should never be abandoned, 
and the game should not be altered negatively to capture a pawn, even 
more so if the player has an advantage in the game. The other, stating that 
the main thing a player who wants to learn how to play well should do is 
to put the king where it is safe. Which he cannot do in his main game, 
because his position is wrecked on both sides and provides the enemy 
with an easy way to attack.
chapter 6
Beginning to arrange the game according  
to Damiano’s third way
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black makes the same move [1...e5], White will move the king’s knight 
to the bishop’s second square [2.Nf3] in order to capture the opposing 
king’s pawn, if it is not protected.8
6. In Book 1, chapter 27, López addresses why a player should not double his pawns 
(place two pawns of the same color on the same file).
7.  L
ópez  notes  in  the  margin:  “Damiano  contradicted  himself,  ignoring  what  he  
showed in his general rules.”
8. The king’s knight moves to the bishop’s third square, not the second.

 BooK III                                                 189
In order to protect it, Black can do three things: move the queen’s knight 
to the bishop’s third square, and this move is the best one; protect it with 
the queen’s pawn, which is not as effective because the king’s bishop is 
shut in; worse is if Black protected it with the king’s bishop’s pawn [2...
f6], because White will take the king’s pawn with the knight [3.Nxe5], 
and if Black took the knight with his bishop’s pawn [3...fxe5], White 
would give check with his queen from the fourth square of the opposing 
rook [4.Qh5+], and not the third square, as Damiano says. This error is 
attributed to the printer or to Damiano’s memory.9
Black can protect the king with the king’s knight’s pawn or move the 
king to his second square.
If Black protected the king with the king’s knight’s pawn [4...g6], White 
would  take  the  pawn  on  the  opposing  king’s  fourth  square  with  his  
queen, giving check [5.Qxe5+].
If Black were to protect the king with his queen [5...Qe7], White would 
capture the king’s rook with the queen [6.Qxh8].
If Black were to take the opposing king’s pawn with the queen, giving 
check [6...Qxe4+], White would move the king to the queen’s square 
[7. K d 1].
Black cannot do harm to the king. It is better for Black to protect the 
king’s knight and the rook’s pawn, which is lost.
If Black moves the knight to the king’s second square [7...Ne7], White 
will take the aforementioned rook’s pawn [8.Qxh7] and seek to exchange 
queens, because it will win playing this way.
All of these moves are taught by Damiano, but before we move forward 
with his game in this way, a warning is in order:
If when White captured the rook with his queen, Black did not take the 
opposing king’s pawn with his queen, giving check, as we have said, but, 
first moved the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [6...Nf6], plan-
9. López notes in the margin here: “Damiano’s memory lapse.”

190 BooK III
ning to trap the queen, White would have moved the queen’s pawn as far 
as it can go [7.d4] in order to provide an opening for the queen’s bishop, 
and would not have moved one square in order not to shut in the king’s 
bishop.
It is necessary that the bishops be ready to help the queen. The player 
should not worry about protecting a pawn, because if the queen is free, 
he has a much better game than does the enemy, with sufficient advantage 
to win it.
If the game were not played this way, White would see his game in a 
tight spot. But White can instead open the way for the two bishops: the 
queen’s bishop to the opposing rook’s third square, where it is in position 
to capture the king’s bishop, which the queen protects; and the king’s 
bishop to give check [8.Bc4+] at the right time, after the opposing king 
moves to the bishop’s second square [7...Kf7]. This latter would not be a 
good move to make right away, because Black would protect the king by 
moving the queen’s pawn as far as it can go. If White took the queen’s 
pawn with his bishop [9.Bxd5+], then, because White could not discover, 
Black would take the bishop with his knight [9...Nxd5]
.
The other reason to make the long move with the queen’s pawn is, when 
it is useful, to move the king’s pawn another square forward, placing it in 
position to capture the knight, protected by the queen’s pawn.
Damiano does not address any of these situations, because they involve 
the type of game that some players play only against beginners. An expe-
rienced player who was known as “the Roman boy” even played this type 
of game with me. The game took place in Rome at the beginning of the 
pontificate of Pope Pius IV in the year 1560.
Having noted the above, let us return to the purpose of discussing Dami-
a no’s g a me .
Note. If, when White gave check with the queen from the fourth square 
of the opposing rook, Black, instead of protecting the king with the 
knight’s pawn, had moved the king to his own second square [4...Ke7], 

 BooK III                                                 191
White would have given check with the same queen, taking the pawn on 
the opposing king’s fourth square [5.Qxe5+].
If Black moved the king to the bishop’s second square [5...Kf7], which 
is the only possible move, White would have given check with the king’s 
bishop from the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [6.Bc4+].
If Black were to protect the king, moving the queen’s pawn as far as it can 
go [6...d5], it would be his best possible move. If Black did not protect the 
king, but, instead, moved the king to the knight’s third square [6...Kg6], 
which is not as good a move, White would give check with the queen 
from the fourth square of the opposing king’s bishop [7.Qf5+].
The only move Black can make is the king to the rook’s third square [7...
Kh6]. White will move the queen’s pawn one square [8.d3+], giving dis-
covered check with the queen’s bishop.
Black cannot make any move except to protect the king with the knight’s 
pawn [8...g5]. White will move the rook’s pawn as far as it can go [9.h4].
If Black does not move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go, it will lose 
the queen with checkmate coming. Damiano, of course, does not make 
another reference to the queen.
If Black does move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go, placing it in po-
sition to capture the opposing bishop and discovering his bishop to the 
opposing queen, White will take the knight’s pawn with his rook’s pawn 
[10.hxg5+], giving double check.
If Black moves the king to the knight’s second square [10...Kg7], which 
is the only possible move, White will give check with his queen from the 
opposing king’s fourth square [11.Qe5+].
The best Black can do is to protect the king with the knight from the 
bishop’s third square [11...Nf6]. White will capture the knight with the 
rook’s pawn, giving check [12.gxf6+], and Black will take the rook’s pawn 
with his queen [12...Qxf6].

192 BooK III
White will capture the queen with his queen [13.Qxf6+], and then it will 
take the queen’s pawn with the king’s bishop [14.Bxd5], leaving it with 
seven pawns.10 Black will have four pawns.
The aforesaid is Damiano’s teaching, although in different words and 
more clearly shown. In this way, Damiano concludes all of the ways to 
play and arrange well the games that begin with the king’s pawn. May 
these ways to arrange the games teach how to play with depth and skill. 
Each person, I believe, even if he or she is not a good player, will see and 
understand. Before I discuss the many ways to arrange the games on of-
fense and defense for both sides—beginning them this way, which Da-
miano began, and in them, showing what Damiano did not discuss or 
attain—I want briefly to address this last way to arrange the game that 
Damiano has shown from the perspective of the attacking side, which in 
Spain is called Damiano’s Gambit Game.11 Since it is long, I will make it 
its own chapter.
chapter 7
Which addresses the true way to know how to 
play the gambit game, with a statement about the 
oversights and errors that Damiano committed in the 
way he showed how to play this gambit. Stating, lastly, 
why this game, more so than any other, is called a 
gambit game, what a “gambit” means, and where  
the term “gambit” originates
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], placing it in posi-
tion to capture the opposing pawn.
10. 13...K xf6.
11. L
ópe
z first learned of the gambit, a strateg y he would popularize, when he visited 
Italy in 1560.

 BooK III                                                 193
If Black were to protect the pawn, moving the king’s bishop’s pawn one 
square [2...f6], White would take the opposing king’s pawn with his 
knight [3.Nxe5].
If Black took the knight with his bishop’s pawn [3...fxe5], White would 
give check with the queen from the fourth square of the opposing rook 
[4 .Q h5+].
If Black moves the king to his own second square [4...Ke7], White will 
take the bishop’s pawn with his queen, on the fourth square of the oppos-
ing king, giving check [5.Qxe5+].
If Black were to move the king to the bishop’s second square [5...Kf7], 
which is the only possible move, White would give check with the king’s 
bishop from the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [6.Bc4+].
The best move Black can make is to protect the king, moving the queen’s 
pawn as far as it can go [6...d5], according to Damiano, and here he speaks 
the truth.
It seems, however, he does not know this move is the best one, because if 
the game were played according to how he demonstrated, it would appear 
to be the worst move.
If White took the queen’s pawn, saying check, with his bishop [7.Bxd5+], 
Black would move the king to the bishop’s third square [7...Kg6].
If White were to move the king’s rook’s pawn as far as it can go [8.h4], 
and Black were to move the pawn of his king’s rook one square [8...h6], 
White would take the queen’s knight’s pawn with his bishop [9.Bxb7].
If Black took the bishop with the queen’s bishop [9...Bxb7], White would 
give checkmate with the queen from the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s bishop [10.Qf5#].
If Black did not take the bishop, but first moved the king’s bishop to the 
queen’s third square [9...Bd6], placing it in position to capture the oppos-
ing queen, White would have moved the queen to the fourth square of 
the opposing queen’s rook [10.Qa5]. Then, White could take the rook or 
the queen’s knight [11.Bxc6], and the rook’s pawn.

194 BooK III
If Black wanted to move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square 
[10...Nc6], placing it in position to take the opposing queen, and then 
moved the rook to the aforementioned knight’s square [11...Rb8], White 
would be left with either an advantage of four pawns and a rook for a 
knight or an advantage of five pawns because it will keep all of his pawns 
and Black would be left with only three.
Damiano says White would be left with only a three-pawn advantage and 
no more if the game were played the other way.12 May each person decide 
for himself if it is better to be left with five pawns or four and a rook for a 
knight, or to be left with three pawns and no other advantage.
If the game is played the first way, knowing how to play, it is beneficial 
to know that if Black does not protect the king against the opposing 
bishop’s check with the queen’s pawn, White will win the entire game by 
force, and not three pawns, as Damiano, not knowing how to play, says. It 
will happen as follows.
After White gives check with the king’s bishop from the fourth square of 
the queen’s bishop, if Black, instead of protecting the king as mentioned, 
moves the king to the knight’s third square [6...Kg6], White will not give 
check with the queen from the fourth square of the king’s bishop—as 
Damiano, who, having reached this position, says—but, first, before giv-
ing check, it will move the king’s rook’s pawn as far as it can go [7.h4].13
If Black moves the rook’s pawn wherever it wants, the game will end in 
checkmate, because if it moved it one square, it would take the square 
away from the king, and if it moves it two squares, I mean, as far as it can 
go [7...h5], White will give check with the queen from the fourth square 
of the opposing king’s bishop [8.Qf5+].
If Black moves the king to the rook’s third square [8...Kh6], which is the 
only possible move, White will give discovered check with the queen’s 
bishop, moving the pawn as far as it can go [9.d4+].
12. López notes in the margin: “Damiano’s mistake.”
13. L
ópe
z notes in the margin: “Damiano did not know how to play the gambit game.”

 BooK III                                                 195
If Black protects the king with the knight’s pawn [9...g5], White will take 
the knight’s pawn with the rook’s pawn, giving check [10.hxg5+].
Whether Black takes or does not take the rook’s pawn with his queen, 
when the king reaches the knight’s second square [10...Kg7], White will 
give checkmate with the queen from the second square of the opposing 
king’s bishop [11.Qf7#]. But if, when White moved the rook’s pawn as 
far as it can go, Black did not move the rook’s pawn, but, instead, moved 
the [king’s] knight to the rook’s third square [Nh6] to defend against the 
queen’s check [Qf5+], White would give checkmate with the rook’s pawn 
[ g 5#].
And if Black moves the knight either to the king’s second square [Ne7] 
or to the bishop’s third square [Nf6], White will give checkmate with his 
queen from the fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [Q g5#].
If Black were not to touch his knight and moved the king’s bishop wher-
ever it wanted, White would give check with the queen from the fourth 
square of the opposing king’s bishop [Qf5+].
If Black moves the king to the rook’s third square [Kh6], which is the 
only possible move, White will advance the queen’s pawn as far as it can 
go [d4+], giving discovered check from the bishop.
If Black protects the king with the knight’s pawn [g5], White will capture 
the knight’s pawn with the rook’s pawn, giving double check [hxg5+]. 
Then, White will give checkmate from the second square of the king’s 
bishop [Qf7#].
If Black makes none of the aforementioned moves, however, and moves 
the queen to the third square of the king’s bishop [7...Qf6], White will 
give check with the queen from the opposing king’s square [8.Qe8+].
If Black moves the king to the rook’s third square [8...Kh6], which is the 
only possible move, White will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go 
[9.d4+], giving discovered check from the queen’s bishop.

196 BooK III
If Black protects the king with the knight’s pawn [9...g5], which is the 
only possible move, White will take the knight’s pawn with the rook’s 
pawn, giving double check [10.hxg5+].
If Black moves the king to the knight’s second square [10...Kg7], which is 
the only move, White will take the queen with the pawn and give check 
[11.gxf6+].
Whichever way Black took, White would give checkmate with the queen 
from the second square of the opposing king’s bishop [12.Qf7#].
If Black did not move the queen to the bishop’s third square, but, instead, 
moved it to the king’s second square [7...Qe7], White would give check 
with the rook’s pawn [8.h5+].
Black moves the king to the rook’s third square [8...Kh6], White will 
move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [9.d4+], giving discovered check 
from the bishop.
If Black moves the knight’s pawn as far as it can go [9...g5], White will 
capture the knight’s pawn en passant with the rook ’s pawn [10.hxg6+], 
giving discovered check from his rook.
If Black takes the rook’s pawn with his king [10...Kxg6], which is the 
only possible move, White will give check with the queen from the third 
square of his king’s knight [11.Q g3+].
Black has nothing other than to move the king to the bishop’s third 
square [11...Kf6], and White will give checkmate with his queen from the 
fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [12.Q g5#].
Thus, in all these lines Black is checkmated.
If the game were played in “passing battle” style, when Black moves the 
queen to the king’s second square [7...Qe7], White will give check not 
with his rook’s pawn, but, rather, with the queen from the opposing 
king’s bishop’s fourth square [8.Qf5+].

 BooK III                                                 197
If Black moves the king to the rook’s third square [8...Kh6], White will 
give check with the queen’s bishop, moving the queen’s pawn as far as it 
can go [9.d4+].
If Black protects the king with the knight’s pawn [9...g5], White will cap-
ture the king’s knight’s pawn with the queen’s bishop, giving check once 
a g a i n   [10. Bx g 5+].
If Black moves the king to the knight’s second square [10...Kg7], White 
will take the queen with his bishop [11.Bxe7].
Whatever piece Black captured the bishop with, White would give check 
with the queen from the second square of the opposing king’s bishop [12.
Q f 7+].
Black  has  no  move  other  than  to  the  rook’s  third  square  [12...Kh6].  
White will move his king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [13.g4].
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will give checkmate by force. 
Since the moves are evident, I will not discuss them anymore.
There is another way by which White could take the queen and not lose 
the bishop, giving check with the queen from the third square of the 
king’s knight [Q g3+] when it gave check from the fourth square of the 
opposing king’s bishop [Qf5+]. This is not necessary, however, since we 
gave checkmate as we said. I wanted to address it, though, so that no one 
would believe this was overlooked, just as in other games we did not make 
some other moves that to other players might seem good.
To return to the subject, if, when White moved the rook’s pawn as far as 
it can go, Black did not make any of the aforementioned moves, but, in-
stead, moved the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [7...d5] against the bish-
op in order to make sure that White cannot give check with the queen 
from the fourth square of Black’s king’s bishop, which is the best possi-
ble move Black can make, White will give check with the rook’s pawn 
[8. h5+].

198 BooK III
If Black were to move the king to the bishop’s second square [8...Kf7], 
White would capture the queen’s pawn with his bishop, giving check 
[9.Bxd5+].
In this way, Black, in order to avoid checkmate, will lose the queen.14
If Black does not move the king to the bishop’s second square, but, in-
stead, moves it to his rook’s third square [8...Kh6], White will move the 
queen’s pawn as far as it can go [9.d4+], giving discovered check with the 
queen’s bishop.
If Black moves the [king’s] knight’s pawn as far as it can go [9...g5], White 
will move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [10.f4], placing it in 
position to take the knight’s pawn and to give checkmate.
If Black, in order to avoid checkmate, moves the king’s bishop to the 
king’s second square [10...Be7], which is the best possible move, White 
will take the queen’s pawn with his king’s bishop [11.Bxd5].
If Black moves the same king’s bishop to his own third square [11...Bf6], 
placing it in position to take the opposing queen, which seems to be a 
good move, White will capture the knight’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn, 
giving check [12.fxg5+].
If Black were to take the bishop’s pawn with his bishop [12...Bxg5], White 
would take the rook with his queen [13.Qxh8], attacking the knight.
If Black took the opposing queen’s bishop with his bishop [13...Bxc1], 
White would take the opposing king’s knight with the king’s bishop [14.
Bxg8] in order to capture the rook’s pawn with his queen, giving check-
mate or winning the whole game.
If Black, in order to defend against checkmate, moves the queen to the 
king’s second square [14...Qe7], White will take the rook’s pawn with his 
bishop [15.Bxh7], protecting the king’s pawn.
14. 9...Qxd5 10.Qxd5+

 BooK III                                                199
If  Black  were  to  take  said  bishop  with  his  queen  [15...Qxh7],  White  
would give checkmate with the queen from the third square of the oppos-
ing king’s bishop [16.Qf6#].15
In this way, whether Black captures or does not capture, White, knowing 
how to play, will win the game without fail.
But if, when White captured the knight’s pawn with the king’s bishop’s 
pawn, Black had not taken the king’s bishop’s pawn, as we said, but, in-
stead, had moved the king to the knight’s second square [12...Kg7], White 
would have given another check with the rook’s pawn from the opposing 
rook’s third square [13.h6+].
If Black moves the king to the knight’s third square [13...Kg6], White will 
take the opposing king’s bishop with the king’s bishop’s pawn [14.gxf6].
If Black took the king’s bishop’s pawn with his queen [14...Qxf6], White 
would give checkmate with the queen from the opposing rook’s fourth 
s q u a re   [15 .Q h5 #].
If Black took the king’s bishop’s pawn with the knight [14...Nxf6], White 
would give checkmate with the queen from the fourth square of the op-
posing king’s knight [15.Q g5#].
But if, when White gave check with the rook’s pawn, Black moved the 
king to his bishop’s square [13...Kf8], White would capture the bishop 
with the king’s bishop’s pawn [14.gxf6].
If Black were to take the king’s bishop’s pawn with the king’s knight [14...
Nxf6], which is better than with the queen, so that it does not get pinned, 
White would move the rook to the king’s bishop’s square [15.Rf1], pin-
ning the knight.
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [15...Nd7], 
protecting the knight and placing it in position to take the opposing 
queen, White will move the queen to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [16.Q g5].
15. Since Black can interpose Q g6, checkmate is not possible until after Qxg6#.

200 BooK III
Now, whether Black moves the queen to the king’s second square or the 
king to his own square [16...Ke8], White will push the king’s pawn one 
square [17.e5], against the knight, winning the knight and the whole 
game.
If Black took the opposing king’s bishop with the knight [17...Nxd5], 
White would give check with the queen from the opposing rook’s fourth 
square [18.Qh5+], and then give checkmate with the same queen from the 
second square of the king’s bishop [19.Qf7#].16
Now, may all players see if Damiano understood this way of playing, be-
cause he was unable to say that he was left with an advantage of more 
than three pawns. This seems to me to be enough to say in order to play 
this gambit, because if it is played another way Black will lose sooner, if 
White is careful not to make an error or to forget the moves that we have 
shown and at the appropriate time. Now, to conclude what we have said 
in this chapter, it is useful to state what “gambit” means, what word it is, 
and why, more than others, this game is called Damiano’s Gambit Game. 
The following is a lesson.
Note. With respect to the last thing we promised to discuss in this chap-
ter, it is useful to know that this term “gambit” derives from the Italian 
language. “Gamba” for the Italians means “pierna” [leg] in Spanish, and 
“gambitare” means in our Castilian “armar zancadilla” [to set a trap]. 
The gambit game means a game of traps and pitfalls, because in all of the 
games that Damiano composed, he did not compose or arrange any other 
game involving more skill or snares than this game.
16. López implies that Black moves his king to e7 [18...Ke7] before White gives check-
mate.

 BooK III                                                 201
chapter 8
Another way to begin the game on offense and 
defense, beginning with the moves from Damiano’s 
second and third games
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4]. Black plays the 
same [1...e5].
White will move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing king’s pawn.
If Black does not protect the king’s pawn, which it can in one of five ways 
[three ways with pieces and two with pawns], and not only the three Da-
miano showed in his gambit game, as we stated above, one with a piece 
and the other two with pawns.17
Since previously we addressed the ways in which Damiano protects the 
king’s pawn, here we will address my ways to protect the pawn. We will 
arrange a game and demonstrate the disadvantages and advantages of 
each way for the players. In addition, we will reveal which way is the best 
and safest to protect the pawn for the good players as well as for the play-
ers who know little.
I say that the pawn can be protected in five ways. It is useful to know 
the first, which is moving the queen’s knight to its bishop’s third square 
[2...Nc6]. Damiano believes that this move is the best one to protect the 
pawn, because he does not understand the problems and disadvantages 
that could arise if the opponent knows how to play a different way than 
Damiano demonstrates. We will see as the game progresses.
The second way is moving the queen’s pawn one square [2...d6], a move 
that Damiano does not consider as effective, as we will show in due time.
The third way is moving the queen’s bishop’s pawn [2...f6], a move that 
Damiano considers the worst because his gambit game is based on this 
17. López notes in the margin: “Damiano miscalculates how to protect the king’s pawn 
from the opposing king’s knight.”

202 BooK III
move against the opponent. If the player makes a different move, the 
game will not end as Damiano describes.
The fourth way is moving the queen to the king’s second square [2...Qe7].
The fifth way is moving the king’s bishop to the queen’s third square [2...
B d6].
Now that we have listed them in general, we will discuss each one in de-
tail, as we promised.
The first is moving the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2...
Nc6].  If  White  moves  the  king’s  bishop  to  the  fourth  square  of  the  
queen’s bishop [3.Bc4], Black similarly will move the king’s bishop to the 
fourth square of the queen’s bishop [3...Bc5]. If White moves the queen’s 
bishop’s pawn one square [4.c3], Black will not move the king’s knight 
to the bishop’s third square [Nf6] as Damiano says. Instead, he will first 
move the queen to the king’s second square [4...Qe7], in order to protect 
her king from that square and in order not to give an advantage to his 
enemy—which could include some moves that Damiano has not shown, 
namely the queen’s pawn, if it were moved as far as it can go and placed in 
position to capture the opposing king’s bishop.
Now, if White moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [5.d4], Black 
will capture it with the king’s pawn [5...exd4]. If White were to take 
the king’s pawn with the queen’s bishop’s pawn [6.cxd4], maintaining 
the threat to the opposing king’s bishop, Black would capture the king’s 
pawn with his queen, giving check [6...Qxe4+].
If White were to move the king to the queen’s second square [7.Kd2], 
Black would give check with the bishop from the fourth square of the 
opposing queen’s knight [7...Bb4+]. Then, Black will take care to prevent 
his enemy from pinning the queen.
If White did not want to move his king and blocked the queen’s check 
with the queen’s bishop from the king’s third square [7.Be3], Black would 
give the aforementioned check with the king’s bishop [7...Bb4+] to pro-
tect his. Then, Black will ensure that White will not be able to take the 

 BooK III                                                203
king’s bishop’s pawn with his bishop, giving check, when if Black took 
the king’s bishop with his king, White would move his knight to the 
fourth square of the opposing king’s knight, giving check.
If White does not move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go, in order not 
to lose the king’s pawn, as we said, but first moves the aforementioned 
queen’s pawn one square [5.d3], Black will move the queen’s pawn one 
square [5...d6] to protect the king’s pawn and to make way for the queen’s 
bishop.
If White moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [6.Ng5], placing it in position to take the king’s bishop’s 
pawn, Black will protect the king’s bishop’s pawn, moving the queen’s 
knight to the queen’s square [6...Nd8].
In this way, Black will be able to arrange his game well, and neither of-
fense nor defense thus having an advantage, the side that knows how to 
play best will win.
chapt
er 9
Another way to begin the game on offense and 
defense, beginning with Damiano’s method
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black makes the same move [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], 
placing it in position to capture the pawn, Black will protect it with the 
first way, moving the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2...Nc6].
If White moves the king’s bishop, not to the fourth square of the queen’s 
bishop, as Damiano says, but, rather, to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [3.Bb5], placing it in position to capture the knight.18
18. The “Ruy López” opening.

204 BooK III
If  Black  moves  the  queen’s  pawn  one  square  [3...d6]  to  protect  the  
pawn, the king’s bishop will be shut in, as Damiano says, and there will 
be another drawback still: White will take the knight with his bishop 
[4.Bxc6+], causing Black to double his pawn [4...bxc6].
Then, White will advance the queen’s pawn as far as it can go to disrupt 
his enemy’s game [5.d4].
Thus, protecting the king’s pawn with the queen’s knight, as Damiano 
says, will not have been a good way to play, because Damiano did not 
consider that the enemy would play the king’s bishop more effectively, 
threatening the queen’s knight from the fourth square of the aforemen-
tioned knight instead of the fourth square of the queen’s bishop.
Let’s put forth other ways to arrange the game, and we will see what hap-
pens with the move that Damiano considered the best one.
chapter 10
Another way to attack and to defend the game, 
beginning like Damiano
White will move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], placing it in posi-
tion to capture the pawn.
If Black were to protect the king’s pawn, moving the queen’s knight to 
the bishop’s third square [2...Nc6], White would move the king’s bishop 
to the fourth square of the opposing queen’s knight [3.Bb5], placing it in 
position to take the aforementioned knight.
Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop 
[3...Bc5] so that it is not shut in.
If White took the queen’s knight with the king’s bishop [4.Bxc6], Black 
would take the king’s bishop with the queen’s pawn [4...dxc6], which is 
better than with the knight’s pawn, as we will see later.

 BooK III                                                205
If White were to take the opposing king’s pawn with the king’s knight 
[5.Nxe5], Black would capture the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn with 
the king’s bishop, giving check [5...Bxf2+].
If White took the bishop with his king [6.Kxf2], Black would give check 
with his queen from the opposing queen’s fourth square [6...Qd4+]. 
Then, it would take the knight with his queen.
In this way, Black will be better because it has an advantage of one move 
when the time comes. White cannot leap because it moved the king, 
which matters now because both sides have their queen, and Black will be 
able to attack more easily.
But if, despite having a good game here, Black preferred not to exchange 
of the king’s bishop, then when White captured the king’s pawn with his 
knight, Black could move the queen to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen [5...Qd4], threatening the knight and the opposing king’s bishop’s 
pawn.
If White moves the knight to the knight’s fourth square [6.Ng4], Black 
will not capture the knight with the queen’s bishop: even though it looks 
like a good move, it is not, because it is better to take the king’s pawn 
with the queen, giving check [6...Qxe4+].
If White moves the king or protects it with the queen, it will lose the 
knight, and if White protected the king with the knight from the king’s 
third square [7.Ne3], Black would take the knight with the king’s bishop 
[7... B x e 3] .
If White took the bishop with the queen’s pawn [8.dxe3], Black would 
take the knight’s pawn with his queen [8...Qxg2], placing it in a position 
to take the rook.
If White moves the rook to the bishop’s square [9.Rf1], Black will move 
the queen’s bishop to the opposing rook’s third square [9...Bh3], winning 
the game.

206 BooK III
And if White did not take the bishop with the queen’s pawn, but rath-
er with the king’s bishop’s pawn [8.fxe3], Black would take the knight’s 
pawn with his queen [8...Qxg2], placing it in position to capture the rook.
If White moves the rook to the bishop’s square [9.Rf1], Black will move 
the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [9...
Bg4], placing it in position to capture the queen, winning the game by 
force.
If, in order to avoid the aforementioned moves, White does not move the 
knight to the knight’s fourth square, but, instead, moves it to the queen’s 
third square [6.Nd3], guarding against checkmate and placing it in a posi-
tion to take the opposing bishop, Black will capture the king’s pawn with 
his queen, giving check [6...Qxe4+].
If White protects the king with his queen [7.Qe2], which is the best pos-
sible move, Black will capture the queen [7...Qxe2+].
Once White takes the queen with his king [8.Kxe2], Black will withdraw 
his bishop to the third square of the queen’s knight [8...Bb6].
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [9.c4] in or-
der to capture the bishop or to trap it, which appears to be a good move, 
Black will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of his own king’s 
bishop [9...Bf5], in order to take the opposing king’s knight and then, 
with the other bishop, Black could take the opposing king’s bishop’s 
paw n [Bx f 2].
If White, in order to solve all of this, moves the aforementioned knight 
to his king’s square [10.Ne1], making it possible for the queen’s bishop to 
move unimpeded, Black will move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third 
s q u a re   [10... Nf 6].
If White moves the queen’s pawn one square [11.d3], Black will leap his 
king to the knight’s third square [11...Kg6].
If White moves the queen’s bishop to the king’s third square [12.Be3] to 
exchange bishops and cluster the pawns, or to capture the opponent’s 
bishop if he is careless, which seems to be a good move, Black will move 

 BooK III                                                207
the king’s rook to the king’s square [Rhe8] so that the queen’s bishop can-
not discover the king.
If White, in order to remove the pin, moves the king to the queen’s sec-
ond square [13.Kd2], Black will take the bishop with his bishop [13...
Bxe 3+].
White capturing the bishop with the king’s bishop’s pawn [14.fxe3], 
Black will move the queen’s rook to the queen’s square [14...Rad8] to win 
the game.
If White moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [15.Nc3], 
Black will move the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [15...Ng4].
If White moves the queen’s knight to the queen’s square [16.Nd1] to 
protect the pawn that is on the king’s third square, Black will move the 
king’s knight to the king’s fourth square [16...Ne5], placing it in position 
to capture the queen’s pawn.
In this way, Black will have won the game.
If, when Black moved the queen’s rook to the queen’s square, White did 
not move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square, but, first, moved 
the king to his own second square [15.Ke2] to remove the pin, Black 
would have moved the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [15...Ng4], placing it in position to take the king’s pawn.
If White were to advance the king’s pawn one square [16.e4], placing it in 
position to take the opponent’s queen’s bishop, Black would capture the 
king’s pawn with the bishop [16...Bxe4].
If White were to take the bishop with the queen’s pawn [17.dxe4], Black 
would take the queen’s pawn with the king’s rook, giving check [17...
R xe 4+].
If White moves the king to the bishop’s third square [18.Kf3], placing it 
in position to capture the opponent’s rook and knight, Black will give 
check with the same rook from the third square of the opposing king 
[18... R e 3+].

208 BooK III
If White took the knight with his king [19.Kxg4] or moved the king to 
the bishop’s fourth square [19.Kf4], which is the only other possibili-
ty, Black would give checkmate with the queen’s rook from the fourth 
square of the opposing queen [19...Rd4#].
If, when Black gave check with the rook, White did not move the king to 
the bishop’s third square, but, first, moved the king to the square of his 
own bishop [f1], Black would have moved the queen’s rook to the oppos-
ing queen’s square
In this way, White, attacking in this manner, will have lost because he 
did not know how to attack the enemy, and because he captured the 
king’s pawn with the knight at the beginning.
Despite this, White could have a good game, for when Black moved the 
king’s rook to the king’s square [12.Rhe8], White could have moved the 
king’s rook’s pawn one square [13.h3], so that the opposing king’s knight 
could not move to the king’s knight’s fourth square, against the bishop, 
before White loses the king’s rook’s pawn. Black could then move this 
knight to the rook’s fourth square [13...Nh5], which seems to be a good 
move but is not, because White would advance the king’s knight’s pawn 
as far as it can go [14.g4], placing it in position to capture the opposing 
knight and bishop.
In this way, White will have won a piece, and, knowing how to play, the 
game.
chapt
er 11
Another way to attack and to defend, beginning with 
Damiano’s aforementioned method
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black makes the same move [1...e5], and White moves the king’s knight 
to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], placing it in position to capture the 
opposing pawn.

 BooK III                                                209
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2...Nc6] in 
order to protect the king’s pawn, still according to Damiano’s first meth-
od, White will move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the oppos-
ing queen’s knight [3.Bb5], threatening said knight.
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3...Bc5], White will not capture the knight with his bishop, as in the 
previous game, but will first move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square 
[4.c3]: first, so that if White were to take the knight [with his bishop] 
and then the king’s pawn with his knight, Black could not move with his 
queen to the opposing queen’s fourth square, as in the aforementioned 
game; and, second, to disrupt the enemy by advancing the queen’s pawn 
as far as it can go, depending on how the opponent moves.
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [4...d6], White will move the 
queen’s pawn as far as it can go [5.d4], against the opposing king’s bishop.
If Black were to withdraw the bishop to the third square of the queen’s 
knight [5...b6], it will have lost the knight, because White would advance 
the queen’s pawn another square [6.d5], placing it in position to take the 
knight, which is pinned by the king’s bishop.19
But if Black does not withdraw the bishop, but first captures the pawn 
with the king’s pawn [5.exd4], White will take the king’s pawn with the 
queen’s bishop’s pawn [6.cxd4].
If Black were to give check with the bishop from the fourth square of the 
opposing queen’s knight [6...Bb4+], White would protect the king with 
the knight from the bishop’s third square [7.Nc3].
If  Black  moves  the  queen’s  bishop  to  his  own  queen’s  second  square  
[7...Bd7] because of the pin, White will move the queen’s bishop to the 
fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [8.Bg5] against the opposing 
queen, in order to disorganize his enemy: for if Black moves the king’s 
bishop’s pawn one square [f6] against the bishop, he will not be able to 
19. The king’s bishop on b5 has Black ’s knight on c6 in an “absolute pin.” The knight 
cannot legally move without placing the king in check.

210 BooK III
create good moves for his pieces; while if Black moves the king’s knight 
to the bishop’s third square [8...Nf6], White will move the queen to her 
own third square [9.Qd3]. If Black moves the queen to the king’s second 
square [9...Qe7], White will move the king’s knight to the queen’s second 
square [10.Nd2], in order to protect the king’s pawn, and so that White 
can move the queen’s knight wherever and whenever it wishes.
If Black were to take the queen’s knight with the king’s bishop [10...Bxc3], 
White would capture the king’s bishop with the queen’s knight’s pawn 
[11.bxc3]. In this way, White will have a great advantage with respect to 
the arrangement of the game.
And from this we see that it is not such a good idea to protect the king’s 
pawn with the queen’s knight from the bishop’s third square, as Damiano 
naively believed, because he did not note the move of the opposing king’s 
bishop, which, as we said, places it in a position to take the knight.
chapter 12
Another way for Black to arrange the game  
against the aforementioned attack
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black makes the same move [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], 
placing it in position to capture the pawn, Black will protect it still ac-
cording to Damiano’s first method, moving the queen’s knight to the 
bishop’s third square [2...Nc6].
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [3.Bb5], placing it in position to take the knight, Black 
will move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [3...
B c5].
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4.c3], Black will 
move the king’s knight to the second square of his own king [4...Nge7].

 BooK III                                                  211
If White moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [5.d4], placing it in 
position to take the opposing bishop, Black will capture the queen’s pawn 
with the king’s pawn [5...exd4].
If White were to take the king’s pawn with the queen’s bishop’s pawn 
[6.cxd4], Black would give check with his bishop from the fourth square 
of the opposing queen’s knight [6...Bb4+].
If White blocks with the queen’s knight from the bishop’s third square 
[7.Nc3], Black will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [7...d5] in 
order to break the game open.
If White took the queen’s pawn with the king’s pawn [8.exd5], Black 
would take the king’s pawn with his queen [8...Qxd5], and, in this way, 
arrange his game well. White will be left with the unaccompanied queen’s 
pawn.
But if White does not capture the queen’s pawn with the king’s pawn, but 
instead moves the king’s pawn one square forward [8.e5], Black will move 
the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [8...
Bg4] in order to capture the knight.
In this way, Black, taking care to place his king in a safe area, will have a 
good game, provided that he knows how to play well, because White is 
somewhat freer since the queen’s knight keeps an eye on the pawn.
chapt
er 13
Another way for Black to arrange the game  
against the aforementioned attack
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], 
placing it in position to capture the pawn, Black will still protect the 
pawn with the queen’s knight from the bishop’s third square [2...Nc6].

212 BooK III
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [3.Bb5], placing it in position to capture the knight, Black 
will move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [3...
B c5].
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4.c3], Black will 
move the king’s knight to the king’s second square [4...Nge7], so that if 
White were to take the [queen’s] knight with his bishop, Black would take 
the bishop with the king’s knight, keeping the king’s pawn protected.
If White does not take the knight with his bishop, but, first, moves the 
queen’s pawn as far as it can go [5.d4], placing it in position to capture 
the bishop, Black would take the queen’s pawn with the king’s pawn [5...
exd4].
If White took the king’s pawn with the queen’s bishop’s pawn [6.cxd4], 
Black would retreat his bishop to the third square of the queen’s knight 
[6... B b 6] .
If White were to advance the queen’s pawn one square [7.d5], placing it 
in position to capture the opposing queen’s knight, Black, to avoid losing 
the queen’s knight, would withdraw it to his own square [7...Nb8].
If White moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [8.Nc3], 
Black will move the king’s rook to the bishop’s square [8...Rf8] for trans-
position.
If White moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [9.Ng5] to capture the rook’s pawn, Black will move the 
rook’s pawn one square [9...h6], placing it in position to take the knight.
If White returns the knight to the third square of the king’s bishop [10.
Nf3], Black will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [10...c6], plac-
ing it in position to capture the opposing bishop.
If White were to withdraw the bishop to the rook’s fourth square [11.
Ba4], Black would move the queen’s pawn one square [11...d6].
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will arrange his game well.

 BooK III                                                 213
Note. If, instead of moving the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square, 
White first moved the queen’s pawn another square forward [8.d6], plac-
ing it in position to take the opposing king’s knight, Black would capture 
the queen’s pawn with the queen’s bishop’s pawn [8...cxd6].
If White were to take the queen’s bishop’s pawn with his queen [9.Qxd6], 
Black would move the queen to the second square of the queen’s bishop 
[9...Qc7] to exchange the queens, because after the exchange Black would 
be able to arrange his game better.
If White does not want to exchange his queen, to protect the queen’s 
bishop, he should move the queen to the queen’s second square, which 
obstructs the bishop.
If White moves the queen to his own square [10.Qd1], it will lose the 
game, because Black will move the queen to the bishop’s fourth square 
[10...Qc5], placing it in position to capture the opposing king’s bishop 
and the king’s bishop’s pawn to give checkmate. Thus, either it will be 
checkmate or White will lose one of his bishops.20
chapt
er 14
Another way for Black to arrange the game against  
the aforementioned attack
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black makes the same move [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3] to 
capture the opposing pawn, Black will still protect it moving the queen’s 
knight to the bishop’s third square [2...Nc6].
20. With respect to López’s conclusion, Jorge Amador notes: “Ruy’s conclusion is 
not totally accurate, for White here could play the KB [king’s bishop] back to e2, which 
saves both bishops and also prevents mate, albeit at the cost of two pawns [f2 and g2 or e4]” 
( J. Amador, personal communication, September 23, 2018).

214 BooK III
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [3.Bb5], placing it in position to take the knight, Black 
will move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [3...
B c5].
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4.c3], Black will 
move his queen to the king’s second square [4...Qe7].
If White took the queen’s knight with his bishop [5.Bxc6], Black will 
take the bishop with the queen’s pawn [5...dxc6] so as not to disorganize 
his game and to provide an opening for the queen’s bishop.
The player should understand that the aforementioned moves do not con-
tradict the general advice that discourages doubled pawns, because the 
doubled pawns permit Black to arrange his game well and to prevent en-
emy incursions. Black necessarily doubles the queen’s pawn because he 
knows how to play and that White wants to capture one of his pawns.
Since Black is in a position that prevents White from capturing a pawn, 
the doubled pawn should not count as doubled, as it might be in a differ-
ent location and circumstance. I put it this way to counsel inexperienced 
players and to avoid the slander of the ill-willed. What I said above re-
bukes Damiano, and with good reason, as any good player free of jealous 
passion will say.
Returning to our game, if White does not capture the aforementioned 
knight, so as to avoid exchanging the bishop, but first moves the king’s 
rook to the bishop’s square [5.Rf1] in order to transpose and make it pos-
sible to attack the enemy more easily,21 then Black could move the king’s 
knight to the bishop’s third square.
Black could also first withdraw the king’s bishop to the queen’s knight’s 
[third] square [5...Bb6], which is a better move, so that the enemy, af-
ter transposing, does not gain a move. Prior to the transposition, Black 
21. López’s use of the word transpose indicates the intention to follow up with a king’s 
leap to g1. Today, this transposition of the king and the rook is a single move known as cas-
tling. In L
ópez’s time, however, castling consisted of two moves.

 BooK III                                                 215
might have prevented White from gaining a move, but to the detriment 
of his game.
If White transposed [6.Kg1], Black would move the queen’s pawn one 
square [6...d6].
If  White  moves  the  queen’s  pawn  one  square.22  If  White  moves  the  
queen’s pawn as far as it can go [7.d4], Black will move the queen’s bishop 
to the queen’s second square [7...d7].
In this way, Black, knowing how to play, will arrange his game well.
Note. I said that it was better for Black to withdraw the king’s bishop to 
the third square of the queen’s knight than to move first the king’s knight 
to the bishop’s third square [5...Nf6], placing it in position to capture the 
opposing king’s pawn, though this may seem to some to be a better move, 
because it threatens the enemy and brings out his pieces.
This would be a good move if the opponent protected the pawn with the 
pawn of his queen; it would not be a good move if he did not guard it but 
first leaped with the king [6.Kg1], because Black will be hemmed in, dis-
organized, or will lose the game if he takes the opposing king’s pawn with 
the king’s knight [6...Nxe4]: White will move the queen’s pawn as far as 
it can go [7.d4], placing it in position to capture the opposing bishop.
If Black were to take the queen’s pawn with the king’s pawn [7...exd4], 
White would capture the king’s pawn with the queen’s bishop’s pawn 
[8.cxd4].
If Black retreated the bishop to the third square of the queen’s knight [8...
Bb6], White would move his rook to the king’s square [9.Re1], placing it 
in position to take the knight.
If Black moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go to protect the knight 
[9...d5] and to provide an opening for the bishop, White will move the 
queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [10.Nc3], threatening the 
knight and the pawn.
22. This sentence, which seems extraneous, appears in López’s manuscript.

216 BooK III
If Black protects the pawn, moving the queen’s bishop to the king’s third 
square [10...Be6], White will capture the knight with the queen’s knight 
[11.Nxe4].
If Black takes the knight with the queen’s pawn [11...dxe4], White will 
capture the queen’s pawn with the rook [12.R xe4].
If Black moves the queen’s rook to the queen’s square [12...Rd8], placing 
it in position to take the opposing queen’s pawn, White will move the 
queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [13.
Bg5], placing it in position to take the queen and the rook.
If Black moves the king’s bishop’s pawn one square [13...f6], protecting his 
queen and placing [the pawn] in position to capture the opposing bishop, 
it is good to know that White will have many good moves it can play: 
either the queen to the king’s second square [14.Qe2] or the king’s bishop 
to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [14.Bc4]. With either move, 
White will win the game by force.
If White played differently after Black captured the king’s pawn with his 
knight [11...Nxe4], White, knowing how to play, would win it. This is 
all that needs to be said to warn players of that move, which appears to 
be good, but is not. It is better to retreat the king’s bishop to the fourth 
square of the queen’s knight, as I have said.
chapter 15
Another way to protect the king’s pawn against  
the opposing king’s knight’s attack
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3] to 
capture the pawn, Black can protect it the second way, moving the queen’s 
pawn one square [2...d6].23 This is the best and safest move, and the one 
23. Today, this move is known as the Philidor Defense [1. e4 e5; 2. Nf3 d6], named for 

 BooK III                                                 217
giving the most freedom to his pieces. Damiano did not consider this to 
be as good as the first way for two reasons. First, he did not notice the 
attacking methods or the drawbacks, as seen in the previous ways to play. 
Second, he overlooked the way or ways in which protecting the pawn in 
this manner could arrange the games so that the pieces remained free and 
the enemy’s means of attack were diminished. So, as will be seen, in my 
opinion this second way of protecting the king’s pawn with the queen’s 
pawn is the best one.24
If White were to move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the 
queen’s bishop [3.Bc4], Black would move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one 
square [3...c6].
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4.c3], Black will 
move the queen’s pawn one square [4...d5], placing it in position to cap-
ture the opposing king’s bishop.
If White were to take the queen’s pawn with the king’s pawn [5.exd5], 
Black would capture the king’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn [5...cxd5].
If White were to give check with the bishop from the fourth square of the 
opposing queen’s knight [6.Bb5+], Black would protect the king with the 
queen’s bishop [6...Bd7].
If White were to take the bishop with his bishop [7.Bxd7+], Black would 
capture the opponent’s bishop with the knight [7...Nxd7], protecting the 
king’s pawn.
If White moves the queen to the knight’s third square [8.Qb3], placing 
it in position to capture the opposing queen’s pawn and the opposing 
queen’s knight’s pawn, Black will move the king’s pawn one square for-
ward [8...e4], placing it in position to take the opposing king’s knight.
the French composer and chess player François-André Danican Philidor (1726–1795). An-
drew Soltis described Philidor as “the best player in the world for 50 years. In fact, he was 
probably about 200 rating points better than anyone else yet alive—set apart by the mys-
teries of the game he had solved” (Soltis, “Tools of the Trade .
 . .,” Chess Life, July 1995, 14).
24. L
ópez notes in the margin: “Damiano miscalculates how to protect the king’s pawn 
from the opposing knight’s attack.”

218 BooK III
If White moves said knight to the queen’s fourth square [9.Nd4], Black 
will  move  the  queen’s  knight  to  the  queen’s  bishop’s  fourth  square  
[9...Nc5], placing it in position to capture the opposing queen.
If White were to give check with the queen from the fourth square of the 
opposing queen’s knight [10.Qb5+], Black would protect the king with 
his queen [10...Qd7], and exchanging [11.Qxd7+], Black would take the 
queen with his king [11...Kxd7] in order to move the queen’s knight to the 
opposing queen’s third square to keep the opponent’s pieces captive.
In this way, Black, knowing how to play, has a better game.
chapter 16
Another way to arrange the game, according to  
the second way to protect the pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black makes the same move [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], 
placing it in position to capture the pawn, Black will move the queen’s 
pawn one square [2...d6], protecting the pawn.
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3.Bc4], Black will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [3...c6].
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4.c3], Black will 
move the queen’s pawn another square forward [4...d5], placing it in posi-
tion to take the opposing bishop.
If White took the queen’s pawn with the king’s pawn [5.exd5], Black 
would take the king’s pawn with the queen’s bishop’s pawn [5...cxd5].
If White were to give check with the bishop from the fourth square of the 
opposing queen’s knight [6.Bb5+], Black would protect the king with the 
queen’s bishop [6...Bd7].

 BooK III                                                 219
If White moves the queen to the knight’s third square [7.Qb3], Black will 
take the opposing king’s bishop with the queen’s bishop [7...Bxb5].
If White took the opposing queen’s bishop with the queen, giving check 
[8.Qxb5+], Black would protect the king with his queen [8...Qd7].
If White took the queen with his queen [9.Qxd7+], Black would take the 
opposing queen with the queen’s knight [9...Nxd7], protecting the king’s 
pawn.
If White were not to take the queen, but instead moved the queen to 
the king’s second square [9.Qe2], placing it in position to capture the 
opposing king’s pawn, Black would move the king’s bishop’s pawn one 
square [9...f6], protecting the king’s pawn, which is the best move, for, if 
Black did not make this move, but advanced the king’s pawn one square 
[9...e4], placing it in position to capture the opposing knight, White 
would move the knight to the opposing king’s fourth square [10.Ne5], 
placing it in position to take the queen.
Wherever  Black  wants  to  go  with  his  queen  [10...Qc7],  White  will  
give check with the queen from the opposing knight’s fourth square 
[11.Qb5+], thus winning either the queen’s knight’s pawn or the queen’s 
pawn, and the whole game.
But if Black went with his queen to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s  rook  [10...Qa4]  to  avoid  that  check,  White  would  move  the  
queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [11.c4] to break up the enemy.
The best move for Black is the king’s bishop to the queen’s third square 
[11...Bd6], placing it in position to capture the opposing knight.
White will move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [12.Nc3], 
placing it in position to take the opposing queen.
If Black were to withdraw the queen to the rook’s third square [12...Qa6], 
White would move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [13.d4].
In this way, knowing how to play, White will have a better arranged game 
than his opponent. This is why I said above that I would not advance the 
king’s pawn against the opposing knight. First I would move the king’s 

220 BooK III
bishop’s pawn one square, to protect the pawn and so that White could 
not take that square with his knight, threatening the queen.
If Black moves the aforementioned pawn of the king’s bishop, it will be 
able to arrange well his attack on the enemy, because all of his pieces can 
move well and comfortably.
chapt
er 17
Another way to arrange the game, according  
to the second way to protect the king’s pawn against 
the knight’s attack
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5].
Whichever move White makes first, either the [king’s] bishop [to the 
queen’s bishop’s fourth square; 2.Bc4] or the king’s knight to the bishop’s 
third square [2.Nf3], placing it in position to capture the opposing king’s 
pawn, Black will still protect the pawn with the second way, moving the 
queen’s pawn one square [2...d6].
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3.Bc4], Black will move the queen’s bishop to the king’s third square 
[3...Be6] to exchange bishops.
If White were to take the bishop with his bishop [4.Bxe6], Black would 
take the bishop with the pawn of his king’s bishop [4...fxe6].
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [5.c3], Black will 
move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [5...Nc6].
If White moves the queen to the knight’s third square [6.Qb3], Black will 
move the queen to the bishop’s square [6...Qc8], protecting the pawns.
If White moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [7.Ng5], placing it in position to capture the bishop’s pawn, 
Black will move the queen’s knight to the queen’s square [7...Nd8], pro-
tecting both pawns.

 BooK III                                                 221
In this way, Black will be able to arrange his game well and make way for 
the king’s bishop, as well as undoubling the pawn if the opponent tries 
to break. Playing cautiously thus, Black will have a good game, for the 
opponent’s attack is very weak and easy to resist. Consequently, it is easily 
proven that the second way to protect the king’s pawn against the oppos-
ing king’s knight’s attack is better and safer, as well as much more condu-
cive to opening up the game and the pieces more comfortably than is the 
first way that Damiano naively demonstrated, as shown by the aforemen-
tioned ways of playing. In addition to the aforementioned three ways of 
arranging a game by this second method, we will address another, which 
is not bad, although not as good as the foregoing, but, as I say, not bad, if 
one knows how to play well. It is the one we will address now.
chapter 18
Another way to arrange the game  
against the king’s knight’s attack according to the 
second way to defend
White will move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black will move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing king’s pawn, Black will 
move the queen’s pawn [2...d6], protecting the king’s pawn.
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3.Bc4], Black will move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go 
[3...f5].
If White took the opposing king’s knight with his king’s bishop [4.Bxg8], 
Black could take the king’s bishop with his rook [4...R xg8].
If White took the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn with the pawn of his 
king [5.exf5], Black would take the opposing king’s pawn with his queen’s 
bishop [5...Bxf5].

222 BooK III
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [6.c3], Black will 
move the king’s bishop to the king’s second square [6...Be7].
If White moves the queen to the knight’s third square [7.Qb3], placing 
it in position to take the opposing king’s rook and the opposing queen’s 
knight’s pawn, Black, in order to protect everything, will leap to the 
queen’s bishop’s square with his king [7...Kc8].
Even though it looks like a good game because it is easy to arrange, it does 
not seem to me to be as good as the first and second ways, although it is 
very good that the enemy’s pieces are pretty well restricted and Black can 
make use of his own pieces more easily. If Black does not want to play this 
way—which is much better than the opponent’s game—knowing how 
to play, he can, instead of moving the king’s bishop to the king’s second 
square, move the queen to the bishop’s square [6...Qc8].
If White moves the king’s knight to the rook’s fourth square [7.Nh4], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing bishop, Black will move the 
aforementioned bishop [f5] to the fourth square of the opposing king’s 
knight [7...Bg4], placing it in position to take the queen.
If White moves the queen to the knight’s third square [8.Qb3], placing 
it in position to capture the opposing king’s rook, Black will move the 
queen’s bishop to the king’s third square [8...Be6], placing it in position to 
take the queen and protecting the rook.
In this way, Black, knowing how to play, can arrange his game very well. 
Or it can move the aforementioned bishop [f5] to the opposing queen’s 
third square [7...Bd3] to enclose the enemy, which is better.
Note. Near the beginning, when White captured the opposing king’s 
knight with the king’s bishop, if, instead of taking the aforementioned 
bishop with his rook, Black did not take the bishop, but rather, the king’s 
pawn with his bishop’s pawn [4...fxe4], placing it in position to capture 
the opposing king’s knight, it would not be a good move, although it 
seems to be good, because White would move the king’s bishop to the 
fourth square of the opposing queen [5.Bd5].

 BooK III                                                223
If Black were to take the knight with his pawn [5...exf3], White would 
capture the pawn with his queen [6.Qxf3], placing it in position to take 
the opposing queen’s knight’s pawn and to give checkmate from the sec-
ond square of the opposing king’s bishop.
If Black wanted to move his queen to protect the king [Qd7] against 
checkmate, White would take the knight’s pawn with his bishop [Bxb7].
In this way, White, knowing how to play, would win the game, because 
he would have one more pawn. Thus, in order not to lose a game that 
can be arranged very well, as we demonstrated, it is not advantageous to 
capture the aforementioned pawn, because it is a bad move, even if those 
players who know little think it is a good move. Now, I conclude the sec-
ond way to protect the pawn; although I could discuss other moves, I will 
not, because the aforementioned ones seem to be the best ones.
chapter 19
Another way to arrange the game against  
the knight’s attack, according to the third way  
to defend the pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black makes the same move [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3] to 
capture the opposing king’s pawn, Black will protect it according to the 
third way, moving the king’s bishop’s pawn one square [2...f6], which Da-
miano says is the worst way to protect the pawn. He would be correct if 
the game were defended the way he demonstrated. If the pawn is defend-
ed as I instruct, it will not look like such a bad move as he made it look 
with his poor play.25
25. López notes in the margin: “Damiano miscalculates the third way to protect the 
pawn against the opponent’s knight’s sorties.”

224 BooK III
If White were to take the pawn with his knight [3.Nxe5], Black will not 
capture the knight with his bishop’s pawn, but, first, move the queen 
to the king’s second square [3...Qe7], placing it in position to take the 
knight.
If White moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [4.d4], protecting the 
knight, Black will move the queen’s pawn one square [4...d6]. Otherwise, 
Black will capture the knight with the bishop’s pawn [4...fxe5] when the 
queen will guard against check.
If White does not advance the queen’s pawn, but in order not to lose the 
knight first gives check with the queen from the opposing rook’s fourth 
square [4.Qh5+], Black will protect the king with the knight’s pawn 
[4 ... g 6].
If White took the knight’s pawn with his knight [5.Nxg6], placing it in 
position to take the opposing queen and rook, Black will take the oppos-
ing king’s pawn with his queen, giving check [5...Qxe4+], and then cap-
ture the knight with the same queen, winning a piece and the game this 
way.
But if, when Black moved the queen to the king’s second square, plac-
ing it in position to take the knight, White did not give this check, but 
instead retreated the knight to the bishop’s third square [4.Nf3], Black 
would capture the opposing king’s pawn with his queen, giving check 
[4 ...Q xe 4+].
If White were to protect the king with his queen [5.Qe2], Black would 
capture the queen [5...Qxe2+]. White, in turn, would capture the queen 
with his bishop [6.Bxe2]. Then, Black would move the queen’s pawn as 
far as it can go [6...d5], striving to bring out his pieces. [Black] will ar-
range the game well because his king has a good place, the bishop’s sec-
ond square, which is free such that it will not lose a move when the time 
comes to move the king.
Note. But if, when I say that White protects the king with his queen, 
White does not protect the king with the queen, but, instead, with the 

 BooK III                                                 225
bishop, moving it to the king’s second square [5.Be2], Black will move the 
queen’s pawn as far as it can go [5...d5].
If White moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [6.Nc3], 
placing it in position to take the opposing queen, Black will move his 
queen to the king’s third square [6...Qe6], protecting the queen’s pawn.
If White moves the king’s rook to the bishop’s square to transpose it 
[7.Rf1], Black will move the pawn of his queen’s bishop one square [7...
c6] to protect the queen’s pawn and to strengthen the game, and to open 
a square where it can leap with his king if it were advantageous and nec-
essar y.
White will move the rook to the king’s square [9.Re1], and Black will 
move the knight to his king’s second square [9...Ne7] after bringing the 
king’s bishop to the third square of his queen [8...Bd6], which he will do 
when White transposes.26 Then, White moves the rook and Black moves 
his knight to the king’s second square, as I said.
In this way, Black will have a safe game, and the enemy cannot attack. 
Black, knowing how to play and taking care to place his king in a safe 
place, will be able to make very effective use of his pieces.
Note. If when Black protected the king’s pawn with the pawn of his bish-
op, White did not capture the pawn with his knight, but, first, moved the 
king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [3.Bc4], Black 
would move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [3...c6], wanting to pro-
voke his enemy.
If White were to take the king’s pawn with his knight [4.Nxe5], Black 
would move his queen to his king’s second square [4...Qe7], placing it in 
position to capture the opposing knight.
If White moves his knight to the opposing bishop’s second square [5.Nf7] 
to capture the rook by force, Black will take the king’s pawn with his 
queen, giving check [5...Qxe4+].
26. Since castling consisted of two moves, White moves his king to g1.

226 BooK III
In order not to lose the king’s bishop, it will be good for White to pro-
tect the king with the queen [6.Qe2]. Black will capture the queen [6...
Q xe 2+].
If White takes the opposing queen with his king [7.Kxe2], Black will 
move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [7...d5], placing it in position to 
capture the opposing bishop.
If White were to take the rook with his knight [8.Nxh8], Black would 
capture the bishop with the queen’s pawn [8...dxc4].27
In this way, Black will have won a piece, because the opposing knight, 
unable to move, is lost. Black, knowing how to play, will win the game. If 
the game were played differently, Black should know that it is always pos-
sible to adjust well, although not as freely as with the second way to de-
fend the pawn. Therefore, this third way is not as good as the second way.
chapter 20
Another way to arrange the game  
against the knight’s attack, according to the  
fourth way to defend the pawn
White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black makes the same move [1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3] to 
capture the opposing pawn, Black can protect it according to the fourth 
way, moving the queen to the king’s second square [2...Qe7], but it is 
not as good as some of the aforementioned ways, because it prevents the 
king’s bishop from moving and the king’s knight as well, should it need to 
move to that square.
27. Jorge Amador notes: “Ruy seems to overlook that White can just capture the d5 
pawn with the bishop, preserving this piece and still winning Black’s rook” ( J. Amador, 
personal communication, September 23, 2018).

 BooK III                                                227
The main reason the fourth way is not as good as other moves is, regard-
less of how effective it is to move the queen to the king’s second square, 
the bishop is as hindered as it was before this move.
In spite of the aforementioned problems, however, it is possible to arrange 
the game in the way we will discuss.
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3.Bc4], Black will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [3...c6].
If White moves the rook to the bishop’s square to transpose [4.Rf1], 
Black will move the queen’s pawn one square [4...d6].
If  White  were  to  leap  with  his  king  [5.Kg1],  Black  would  move  the  
queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing king’s knight [5...
Bg4], placing it in position to capture the knight.
If White moves the queen’s pawn one square [6.d3], Black will move his 
queen to the third square of the king’s bishop [6...Qf6] to ruin the ene-
my’s transposed position.
If White moves the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [7.Nbd2] 
to prevent having his position wrecked, Black will move the king’s bishop 
to the king’s second square [7...Be7].
If White moves the rook’s pawn [8.h3], placing it in position to take the 
bishop, Black will not withdraw it to the rook’s fourth square, because it 
would lose it when White advanced the knight’s pawn as far as it can go 
[9.g4], placing it in position to capture the aforementioned bishop, and 
if Black were to move the bishop to the third square of the king’s knight 
[9...Bg6], White would advance the knight’s pawn one more square [10.
g5], placing it in position to take the queen.28
If Black moved the queen to the fourth square of the opposing king’s 
bishop [10...Qf4], which is the only possible move, White would move 
the queen’s knight to his own square [11.Nb1]. In this way, White will 
have won the queen.
28. Black moves his bishop to h5 before g6.

228 BooK III
It is for this reason that I said above that if White were to advance the 
rook’s pawn one square, placing it in position to capture the bishop, 
Black would not retreat his bishop to the rook’s fourth square, but in-
stead would move the bishop to the king’s third square [8...Be6] to ex-
change it for the opposing king’s bishop.
In this manner, Black, knowing how to play, can arrange his game well. 
If the game were played another way, be it known that, knowing how to 
play, Black will be able to adjust well. And this is enough for this way of 
playing.
chapter 21
Another way to arrange the game against  
the king’s knight’s attack, protecting its pawn, 
according to the fifth way to defend  
the pawn
White will move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1.e4].
Black making the same move [1...e5], if White moves the king’s knight 
to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], placing it in position to capture the 
opposing king’s pawn, which Black can protect according to the fifth way, 
moving the king’s bishop to the queen’s third square [2...Bd6].
This is the worst way of all, as it hinders and hems in his pieces and 
pawns.
Although this is not a good way to play a game, still I will explain how 
to deal with it, because many players starting to learn this game usually 
make this move, which is truly a beginner’s move, but it is played.
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3.Bc4], Black will move his queen to the king’s second square [3...
Q e 7].
If White moves the queen’s pawn one square [4.d3], Black will move the 
king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [4...Bc5].

 BooK III                                                229
If White moves the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [5.Ng5], placing it in position to capture the bishop’s pawn, 
Black will move the king’s knight to the rook’s third square [5...Nh6], 
protecting the pawn.
If White moves his queen to the opposing rook’s fourth square [6.Qh5], 
Black will move the queen’s pawn one square [6...d6].
If White moves the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [7.f4], Black 
will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing king’s 
knight [7...Bg4], placing it in position to take the opposing queen.
If White moves the queen to the rook’s fourth square [8.Qh4], which is 
the only move, Black will move the [king’s] bishop’s pawn one square [8...
f6], placing it in position to take the knight.
If White moves the [king’s] rook’s pawn one square [9.h3], placing it in 
position to take the bishop, Black will capture the knight with his pawn 
[9...fxg5], threatening the queen and winning the knight.
If White took the bishop’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn [10.fxg5], plac-
ing it in position to take the knight, Black would retreat the bishop to 
the queen’s second square [10...Bd7]. White would not be able to capture 
the knight with his pawn because Black would take the queen with his 
queen.
If White were to give check with his queen [11.Qh5+], Black would pro-
tect his king with the knight [11...Nf7], and the best move for White is 
to advance the king’s bishop’s pawn to the opposing knight’s third square 
[12.g6], placing it in position to take the knight that protects the king.
The best move for Black to avoid losing the game is not to move the 
knight, but to move the queen’s bishop to the king’s third square [12...
Be6]. In this way, Black will be arranged well, without giving an advan-
tage to his opponent.
But, when I said that if White moves the rook’s pawn one square, placing 
it in position to capture the bishop the aforementioned way to play would 
follow, if instead White did not move the rook’s pawn, but first were to 

230 BooK III
take the king’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn or to move the king’s rook to 
the bishop’s square [9.Rf1], Black would capture the knight with his bish-
op’s pawn [9...fxg5]. White taking the opposing bishop’s pawn [10.fxg5], 
Black would move the king’s rook to the bishop’s square [10...Rf8].29
Knowing how to play thus, he will have won the piece and will win the 
game. But, knowing how to play, when White pushed the pawn against 
the knight, Black plays it to the queen’s square, and not the bishop as we 
said above, keeping the piece.
Note. If Black moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the op-
posing king’s knight [7...Bg4], placing it in position to take the oppos-
ing queen, then White does not move his queen, as said earlier, but first 
captures the opposing king’s bishop’s pawn with his king’s bishop, giving 
check [8.Bxf7+]. Black will not capture the opponent’s bishop with his 
knight, because it will have lost a pawn, as White captures the bishop 
with his queen, but first Black captures the aforementioned bishop with 
his queen [8...Qxf7].
White taking the queen with his knight [9.Nxf7], Black captures the 
opposing queen with his bishop [9...Bxh5], and White takes the rook 
with his knight [10.Nxh8]. Black moves the king to the knight’s square 
[10...Kg8], winning a piece and the game, knowing how to play, because 
even though White has a rook and a pawn in exchange for a bishop and 
a knight, Black still has an advantage. With this, we conclude all of the 
ways to protect the pawn.
chapt
er 22
Beginning the game with the queen’s  
pawn, according to Damiano
In the third chapter of his book, Damiano writes about this way to ar-
range the game, starting with the queen’s pawn. I will couch it in differ-
ent terms, to make it clearer for players.
29. Subsequent moves here would be 11.R xf8+, 11...Kxf8, and 12.g3.

 BooK III                                                 231
The second way, Damiano says, is to begin with the queen’s pawn thus.
If White moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [1.d4], and Black 
makes the same move [1...d5], White will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn 
as far as it can go [2.c4].
If Black took the queen’s bishop’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [2...dxc4], 
White would move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [3.e4].
If Black moves the queen’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [3...b5] to pro-
tect the queen’s pawn, White will move the queen’s rook’s pawn as far as 
it can go to [4.a4] to break up the queen’s knight’s pawn.
If Black were to take the rook’s pawn with the knight’s pawn [4...bxa4], 
White would capture the queen’s pawn with the king’s bishop [5.Bxc4]. 
Then, Black will lose the knight’s pawn by force, as White will move the 
queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square.
Note. If Black did not capture the rook’s pawn with his knight’s pawn, 
but instead moved the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4...c6], White 
would take the knight’s pawn with his rook’s pawn [5.axb5].
If Black took the rook’s pawn with the bishop’s pawn [5...cxb5], White 
would move the queen’s knight’s pawn one square [6.b3].
If Black were to take the queen’s knight’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn 
[6...cxb3], White would capture the opposing knight’s pawn with the 
king’s bishop, giving check [7.Bxb5+].
If Black were to protect his king with his bishop [7...Bd7], White would 
take his other pawn with his queen [8.Qxb3].
Black will capture the opposing bishop with his bishop [8...Bxb5], White 
will take the bishop with his queen, giving check [9.Qxb5+].
If Black protected his king with the queen [9...Qd7], White would ex-
change, because Black’s rook’s pawn will be unaccompanied. Black will 
lose the rook’s pawn by force. White will double his rooks and use the 
bishop and knight to win the queen’s rook’s pawn.30
30. A player doubles his rooks when he moves both rooks to the same open file. In this 
position, the player is able to attack with more efficiency.

232 BooK III
Note. If Black did not take the bishop with his bishop, but instead moved 
the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [8...Nc6] to capture the 
opposing queen’s pawn, White would move the queen’s bishop to the 
king’s third square [9.Be3], protecting the pawn.
If Black moves the queen’s rook to the knight’s square [9...Rb8], White 
will move the queen out of the pin and move it to the rook’s fourth 
square [10.Qa4].
If Black moves the queen to his knight’s third square [10...Qb6], White 
will move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [11.Nc3]. Then, 
White will take the knight with his bishop, winning the rook’s pawn, 
and make sure to move the king’s knight and to make use of the rooks, 
exchanging pieces because it will lead to victory.
All of the aforementioned is Damiano’s teaching, but even though this 
game appears to be the one that Damiano arranged the best, I think it 
is good to tell the players about something in this game, which I will ad-
dress now.
Note. Damiano says that when Black moves the queen’s knight to the 
bishop’s third square to capture the opposing queen’s pawn, White moves 
the queen’s bishop to the king’s third square to protect the pawn.
It seems to me to be more effective to advance the queen’s pawn one 
square [9.d5], placing it in position to capture the aforementioned knight.
If Black moves the knight to the king’s fourth square [9...Ne5], White 
will move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [10.f4] toward this 
knight, so that the opposing pieces are not in a position to attack.
If Black moves the knight [instead] to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen [9...Nd4], placing it in position to take the queen and the bishop, 
White will capture the opposing bishop with his bishop, giving check [10.
Bxd7+].
If Black takes the bishop with his queen [10...Qxd7], White will move his 
queen to her third square [11.Qd3], placing it in position to capture the 
opposing knight.

 BooK III                                                 233
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [11...e5] to protect the 
knight, the opposing queen’s pawn will be left free and close to queening.
In addition to which, White moves the queen’s bishop to the king’s third 
square [12.Be3], placing it in position to capture the knight.
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [12...Bc5], White will move the king’s knight to the king’s second 
square [13.Ne2].
This way, White will have a much better game. If the play goes differently, 
White, knowing how to play, will always have a better game.
But let us say that the bishop were not played as Damiano says. Instead, 
Black moved the rook to the knight’s square [9...Rb8], White moved the 
queen to the rook’s fourth square [10.Qa4], Black moved his queen to 
the knight’s third square [10...Qb6], and White moved the knight to the 
bishop’s third square [11.Nc3]: it would not be good for White to capture 
the knight with his bishop, as Damiano says, if he [White] is not aware of 
what Black will do, because if he does not move the queen from where it 
is, White will lose the game.
In my view, whatever Black plays, White, knowing how to play, will win 
the game more easily by not exchanging the bishop for the knight, in-
stead making sure to move the knight and leap with the king, and using 
his rooks. Furthermore, there is no reason to make the exchanges Da-
miano suggests, because exchanging benefits Black more by removing as 
much of the enemy as possible. And this is all that needs to be said about 
this game.
chapt
er 23
Another way to arrange the game, beginning  
with the queen’s pawn
White moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [1.d4].
Black makes the same move [1...d5].

234 BooK III
White moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bishop 
[2.Bf4].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bish-
op [2...Bf5], White will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go 
[3.c4].
If Black captures the queen’s bishop’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [3...
dxc4], White will move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square 
[4 . Nc 3].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [4...Nc6], 
placing it in position to take the opposing queen’s pawn, White will move 
the king’s pawn as far as it can go [5.e4], placing it in position to capture 
the opposing bishop.
If Black withdraws the bishop to the third square of the king’s knight 
[5...Bg6], White will move the queen’s pawn one square forward [6.d5], 
placing it in position to take the opposing knight.
If Black moves said knight to the rook’s fourth square [6...Na5], White, 
playing in the Italian way, “passing battle,” will win the knight, moving 
the queen’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go.
If the game is not played the Italian way, White will give check with his 
queen from the rook’s fourth square [7.Qa4+].
If Black moves the queen’s knight’s pawn one square [7...b6] to stop 
White from capturing the knight with his queen, White will move the 
queen’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [8.b4], placing it in position to 
take the knight.
If Black takes the queen’s knight’s pawn in passing with his queen’s pawn 
[8...cxb3], to wit, one square back, White would capture the queen’s pawn 
with his rook’s pawn [9.axb3], discovering the rook against the knight.
If Black moves the queen’s knight’s pawn one square [9...b6] to protect 
the knight, White, either by moving the rook’s pawn one more square 
against the knight, or by capturing the bishop’s pawn with the queen’s 

 BooK III                                                 235
pawn [10.dxc6], will have won the game in all ways, although it is best 
to take the bishop’s pawn before advancing the other pawn against the 
knight.
Note. When White captured the queen’s pawn with the rook’s pawn, 
discovering the rook to the opposing knight, Black could have moved 
the king’s pawn one square [9...e6], because if White were to take the 
knight with his queen [10.Qxa5], Black would take the queen with his 
queen [10...Qxa5]. If White took the knight with his rook [11.R xa5], 
Black would move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the oppos-
ing queen’s knight [11...Bb4], placing it in position to take the opposing 
rook and knight and giving him [White] a bad game. Consequently, 
when Black moved said pawn one square, White, instead of taking the 
knight, would move the pawn one square forward [10.b4], placing it in 
position to capture the knight. If Black took the queen’s pawn with the 
king’s pawn [10...exd5], then White would capture the king’s pawn with 
the queen’s knight [11.Nxd5]. If Black moved the queen’s knight’s pawn 
as far as it can go [11...b5], placing it in position to capture the opposing 
queen, White would take it with his king’s bishop [12.Bxb5]. Black taking 
the king’s bishop with the bishop’s pawn [12...cxb5], White would take 
the bishop’s pawn with his queen, giving check [13.Qxb5+]. If Black cov-
ers his king with the queen [13...Qd7], White will give check with the 
knight from the second square of the opposing queen’s bishop [14.Nc7+].
In this way, it will either be checkmate or Black will lose the queen. If the 
game proceeds differently, White should be aware that, knowing how to 
play well, he will always win, because if earlier he did not want to advance 
the king’s bishop’s pawn toward the knight, as stated above, he could ad-
vance the queen’s pawn one square, that is, in the direction of the oppos-
ing queen’s third square, obstructing the opposing king’s bishop’s exit. In 
this way, White will win the knight and the game. This is all that needs 
to be said about how to arrange the game when starting with the queen’s 
pawn.

236 BooK III
chapter 24
Other ways to begin the games, not starting  
with the aforementioned ways
Players who are not skilled in this game usually begin their games in none 
of the aforementioned ways. For example, by opening with one of the 
knight’s pawns. Since I have seen people playing this way many times, I 
will say something about these methods of playing for purposes of teach-
ing and not to show how to arrange the games by these ways to begin.
Note 1: The first observation is that if White moves the king’s knight to 
the bishop’s third square [1.Nf3], Black will move the queen’s pawn as far 
as it can go [1...d5] so that his opponent is unable to arrange around his 
game the king’s pawn. Then, Black will continue its game according to 
what the opponent does.
Note 2: The second observation is that if White begins by moving the 
queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [1.Nc3], Black will move the 
queen’s pawn as far as it can go [1...d5] if he does not want his opponent to 
be able to rearrange around the king’s pawn without losing many moves. 
If Black wants to let White arrange around the king’s pawn, he will move 
the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], because he will still have a bet-
ter arrangement than his opponent, as White has left behind the queen’s 
bishop’s pawn, around which the player going first usually sets up his 
game to break down the enemy.
Note  3: The third observation is that if White begins by moving the 
queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [1.c4], Black will move the king’s 
pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], and if White moves the king’s pawn as far 
as it can go [2.e4], Black will move the king’s bishop to the fourth square 
of the queen’s bishop [2...Bc5].
In  this  way,  Black  will  arrange  his  game  well,  because  the  opposing  
queen’s fourth square is available for the queen’s knight and the king’s 
bishop is freer to attack his enemy, as there is no pawn that can easily 
hinder it.

 BooK III                                                237
Note 4: The fourth observation is that if White begins by moving the 
king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [1.f4], Black will move the queen’s 
pawn as far as it can go [1...d5], and if White moves the queen’s pawn as 
far as it can go [2.d4], Black will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth 
square of the king’s bishop [2...Bf5].
In this way, Black will proceed with his game as needed, with his bishops 
freer to attack than the enemy’s, moreover with the fourth square of the 
opposing king available for the king’s knight to move into.
Note 5: The fifth observation is that if White were to begin his game by 
moving one of his knights’ pawns in order to create an opening for the 
bishops [1.g3], Black should do nothing other than moving the king’s and 
queen’s pawn [1...d5], depending on how the enemy plays, thus making 
sure to fortify his game by cautiously bringing out his pawns and pieces 
so that his play is free and his enemy’s is cramped.
This is enough to inform those who wish to be good players, because it is 
not worthwhile to dwell on these ways of playing, which any good player 
should not use. As they say, a game that is played with complete integrity 
is one in which neither player gives an advantage. We will demonstrate 
now how to play a game with advantages, according to what they are.



BOOK IV



 241
chapter 1
How to arrange the game to defend  
against a player who receives an advantage  
of two moves
White moves the king’s pawn and the queen’s pawn as far as they can go 
[e4; d 4].
Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [1...c6] and not any 
other pawns, that is, neither the king’s pawn nor the queen’s pawn, be-
cause this would confine the pieces and give the enemy advantageous 
moves.
As I say, Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [c6], waiting 
to see what the enemy will do.
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2.c4], Black 
will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [2...d5].
If White took the opposing queen’s pawn with his king’s pawn [3.exd5], 
Black would take the king’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn [3...cxd5].
If White took the bishop’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn [4.cxd5], Black 
would take the opposing bishop’s pawn with his queen [4...Qxd5].
In the case that White were to receive the advantage of an extra move, he 
would move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [5.Nc3], plac-
ing it in position to take the opposing queen. It would be good for Black 
in this type of advantage to break the game open so that his pieces can be 
free and not hindered, and the opponent’s pieces free as well, moreover 
enjoying compensation for his move in that his pawns remain together 
and White’s queen’s pawn is alone. Although, knowing better, at the mo-
ment this is not as important as breaking up the enemy.
So White, moving the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square, as 
I said, placing it in position to capture the opposing queen, Black will 
withdraw his queen to her own square [5...Qd8].

242 BooK IV
If White moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bish-
op [6.Bf4], Black will move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square 
[6... Nf 6] .
If White moves the queen’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [7.Nb5], to fork the king and rook in a subsequent move, 
Black will move the king’s knight to the fourth square of his queen [7...
Nd5], placing it in position to take the opposing queen’s knight if it 
moves into check, and to guard against the check.
If White moves the aforementioned bishop to the king’s third square 
[8.Be3], Black will give check with his queen from the rook’s fourth 
s q u a re   [8...Q a5+].
If White protects the king, moving the queen to her own second square 
[9.Qd2], Black will capture the queen with his queen [9...Qxd2+], and 
after White takes the opposing queen with his king [10.Kxd2], Black will 
be able to arrange his game well.
Note. If, when Black moved the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square, 
White, before moving the queen’s knight, as we said earlier, moved the 
king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [7.Bc4] so that 
Black could not move the knight to his queen’s fourth square [Nd5], 
Black will move the king’s pawn one square [7...e6].
If White moves the queen’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [8.Nb5] to give check in a subsequent move from [c7], to 
fork the king and rook, Black will move the queen’s knight to the rook’s 
third square [8...Na6].
If White moves the queen to the rook’s fourth square [9.Qa4], Black will 
move the queen’s bishop to the queen’s second square [9...Bd7].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [10.Nf3], 
Black will move the king’s bishop to the king’s second square [10...Be7] 
and will seek to castle.
In this way, Black will arrange his game well and will be able to attack his 
enemy.

 BooK IV                                                243
Note. If, in the beginning, White does not want to wreck the king’s pawn, 
it will move it one square forward [3.e5].
Black will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bish-
op [3...Bf5].
If White were to advance the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4.c5] to 
confine his opponent, Black would move the queen’s knight’s pawn one 
square [4...b6] to try to break up the enemy.
If Black were not happy playing this way, it could capture the opposing 
queen’s bishop’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [3...dxc4] when White 
moved the king’s pawn one square forward [3.e5].
If White captures the opposing queen’s pawn with his king’s bishop 
[4.Bxc4], Black will move the king’s pawn one square [4...e6] and bring 
out the queen’s knight to place it on the queen’s fourth square.
However, in order to avoid blocking the queen’s bishop, it is better to 
move the bishop first than to capture the pawn.
chapt
er 2
How the player who receives an advantage  
of two moves for the king’s bishop’s pawn should 
arrange the game
White, needing to make two moves in exchange for the king’s bishop’s 
pawn,31   does not move both the king’s and the queen’s pawns as far as 
they can go, because, although they look like good moves, they are not, 
as Black would move the king’s pawn as far as it goes [1...e5], disrupting 
W h ite’s g a me .
If White took the opposing king’s pawn with the queen’s pawn [2.dxe5], 
Black would give check with the queen from the fourth square of the op-
posing rook [2...Qh4+].
31. In this chapter, White makes the first two moves in exchange for removing the 
king’s bishop’s pawn.

244 BooK IV
If White were to protect the king with the knight’s pawn [3.g3], Black 
would  take  the  king’s  pawn  with  the  queen,  giving  check  again  [3...
Qxe4+]. It would also be in a position to capture the rook.
If White did not protect the king with the knight’s pawn, but instead 
moved the king to the queen’s second square [3.Kd2], Black would take 
the king’s pawn with his queen [3...Qxe4].
In this way, Black would have discomfited White, and, furthermore, 
would have caused the opponent to move the king.
Therefore, in order to avoid this disruption, as I said, White should not 
move the two pawns, but first should move the king’s pawn as far as it can 
go [1.e4] and the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [1.Nf3].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], then White will 
not take the king’s pawn with his knight, for fear of the aforementioned 
check, but rather will move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the 
queen’s bishop [2.Bc4].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [2...Bc5], White will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [3.c3].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [3...Nc6], 
White will move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [4.d4].
If Black took the opposing queen’s pawn with the king’s pawn [4...exd4], 
White would take the king’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn [5.cxd4], at-
tacking the opposing bishop.
If Black were to give check with the bishop from the fourth square of the 
opposing queen’s knight [5...Bb4+], White would protect the king with 
the queen’s knight from the bishop’s third square [6.Nc3].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [6...Nf6], 
White will advance the king’s pawn one square [7.e5], placing it in posi-
tion to capture the knight.
If Black moves the aforementioned knight to the opposing king’s fourth 
square [7...Ne4], White will move his queen to the third square of her 

 BooK IV                                                245
knight [8.Qb3], placing it in position to take the opposing king’s bishop, 
or to her own third square, placing it in position to capture the knight.
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will arrange his game well.
If play goes differently from the aforesaid, be aware of these moves while 
proceeding as necessary, because White, knowing how to play, will ar-
range his game well.
chapt
er 3
Another way the player who receives an  
advantage of two moves for the king’s bishop’s  
pawn can arrange the game
White has two moves for the king’s bishop’s pawn. In my view, the best 
and safest moves are the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [1.d4] and the 
queen’s bishop to the king’s bishop’s fourth square [1.Bf4].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [1...d5], White will 
move the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2.c4].
If Black took the queen’s bishop’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [2...dxc4], 
White would move the king’s pawn one square [3.e3].
If Black were to advance the queen’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [3...
b5] to protect the queen’s pawn, White would push the queen’s rook’s 
pawn as far as it can go [4.a4].
If Black takes this pawn with the queen’s knight’s pawn [4...bxa4], White 
will capture the opposing queen’s pawn with the king’s bishop [5.Bxc4], 
or, alternatively, it will capture the queen’s knight’s pawn with his queen, 
giving check [5.Qxa4+], and then will capture the other one.
If Black does not take the rook’s pawn with the queen’s knight’s pawn, 
but first moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4...c6] to protect 
the knight’s pawn, White will capture the knight’s pawn with the rook’s 
paw n [5 . a xb5].

246 BooK IV
If  Black  captures  the  rook’s  pawn  with  his  bishop’s  pawn  [5...cxb5],  
White will move the queen’s knight’s pawn one square [6.b3].
In this way, White, knowing to play, will win that pawn by force and 
disrupt his opponent’s game. Then, White will capture the rook’s pawn, 
which is left alone.
White, being more knowledgeable, will win the game. But if Black plays 
another way, White should take note of what Black plays so that he can 
arrange his game very well, and safely, while attacking the enemy in such 
a way that the opponent will have to keep defending instead of attacking. 
This is enough.
chapter 4
How the player who receives first move  
advantage for the king’s bishop’s pawn should  
arrange the game
White, who gets to play first in exchange for the king’s bishop’s pawn, 
moves the king’s pawn one square [1.e3].32
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [2.d4].
If Black captures the queen’s pawn with the king’s pawn [2...exd4], White 
will take the king’s pawn with his king’s pawn [3.exd4].
If Black were to give check with his queen from the opposing rook’s 
fourth  square  [3...Qh4+],  White  would  protect  the  king  with  the  
knight’s pawn [4.g3].
If Black were to give check with the same queen from the opposing king’s 
fourth square [4...Qe4+], White would protect his king with his queen 
[5.Qe2]. The two sides would exchange the queens by force, after which 
the game would continue without the queens.33
32. Unlike today, White did not always make the first move (see footnote 167 in book 1, 
chapter 27). White exchanges his king’s bishop’s pawn for the first move.
33. “Today’s chess player would likely consider trading Queens this early in the game 

 BooK IV                                                247
The pawn deficit is not such a liability, because White will not have to 
deal with defending it, and his pieces will enjoy more freedom. White, 
knowing more, will defeat his opponent.
If Black does not want to capture the queen’s pawn with his king’s pawn, 
but, first, advances the king’s pawn one more square [2...e4], White will 
move the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [3.c4].
In this way, White will arrange his game well, always attacking his ene-
my and making sure to use all of his pieces as he wishes. This is enough 
for this game, because every player will be able to make use of the games 
and moves we will present when discussing the ways to arrange the game 
against  this  pawn’s  attack  when  the  occasion  arises  in  other  similar  
games. Now I will only show another way to play for those players who, 
giving the aforementioned pawn for the move, do not wish to exchange 
queens later.
chapter 5
Another way for the player who receives  
first move advantage for the king’s bishop’s pawn  
to arrange the game
White, having the first move in exchange for the king’s bishop’s pawn, 
if he does not want to exchange the queen or arrange his game as above, 
should arrange it in the following manner.
White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [1.c3].
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [2.d4].
If Black were to advance the king’s pawn one more square [2...e4], White 
would move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bishop 
[3.Bf4].
a foolish strateg y, especially if one side [White] already has a pawn deficit and the move 
does not include proper compensation” ( J. Amador, personal communication, September 
23 , 2018).

248 BooK IV
If Black moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [3...d5], White will 
move the king’s pawn one square [4.e3].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [4...c5], White 
would do better not to capture the opposing queen’s knight with his 
queen’s bishop [5.Bxb8], because after Black takes the opponent’s bishop 
with his rook [5...R xb8], White will give check with his queen from the 
rook’s fourth square [6.Qa4+].
If Black protects his king with the queen’s bishop [6...Bd7], White will 
capture the rook’s pawn with his queen [7.Qxa7].
If Black were to take the queen’s pawn with the bishop’s pawn [7...cxd4], 
White would capture the bishop’s pawn with his queen [8.Qxd4], which 
would have two benefits: saving the queen from danger and leaving a 
square open where he could move the king’s knight, so that he can play 
with all of his pieces.
If Black were not to capture the aforementioned pawn with the bishop’s 
pawn, but first pushed the bishop’s pawn one square [7...c4] to close lines 
for the opposing queen and the opposing king’s bishop, White would 
move the queen’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [8.b4].
If  Black  were  to  take  the  queen’s  knight’s  pawn  en  passant  with the 
queen’s bishop’s pawn [8...cxb3], White would capture the queen’s bish-
op’s pawn with his rook’s pawn [9.axb3], freeing up the queen.
If Black did not take the queen’s knight’s pawn with the queen’s bishop’s 
pawn, but instead moved the queen’s bishop to the bishop’s third square 
[8...Bc6] to capture the queen if she captures the opposing knight’s pawn 
[Qxb7], White would move the queen to the rook’s third square [9.Qa3], 
leaving it free and positioned well.
If the game goes another way, you need to know how to play. Based on 
what I will say, however, it is not good for White to play the aforemen-
tioned way.
Note. If Black knows how to play, when White advances the queen’s 
knight’s pawn as far as it can go [8.b4] to create a square for the queen so 

 BooK IV                                                249
as not to lose her, Black will move the king’s knight to the king’s second 
square [8...Ne7]. It would be good for White to retreat the queen to the 
rook’s third square to avoid losing the queen [9.Qa3]. If White does not 
make this move, he will lose the queen because Black will move the rook, 
placing it in a position to capture the queen from his own square [9...
R xa7]. If White were to take the knight’s pawn with his queen [10.Qxb7], 
Black would move the queen’s bishop to the bishop’s third square [10...
Bc6]. In this way, White will lose the queen.
If White does not take the knight’s pawn with his queen, but, first, moves 
the queen to the opposing queen’s bishop’s fourth square [9.Qc5], Black 
will move the queen’s bishop to the bishop’s third square. Then, Black 
will move the knight to the king’s bishop’s fourth square [9...Nf5], and 
discovering the king’s bishop to the opposing queen, the queen and the 
whole game will be lost.
But if, as we said, White retreats the queen to the rook’s third square 
[9.Qa3], Black will move the king’s knight to the fourth square of the 
king’s bishop on the opposing king’s pawn [9...Nf5].
If White were to come back with the queen to the bishop’s square [10.
Qc1], protecting the king’s pawn, Black would give check with his queen 
from the opposing rook’s fourth square [10...Qh4+].
In this way, Black, knowing how to play, will defeat White. It is for this 
reason that it is not good to play this way, even though it looked good.
Note. If, when Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go 
[4...c5], White does not take the knight with the queen’s bishop, but in-
stead seeks to bring out his pieces, giving check first with the king’s bish-
op from the opposing queen’s knight’s fourth square [5.Bb5], if Black 
protects the king with the queen’s knight [5...Nd7], White will move the 
king’s knight to the king’s second square [6.Ne2].
In this way, White will arrange his game, not wishing to exchange his 
queen.

250 BooK IV
chapter 6
Another way for the player who  
receives an advantage of the king’s bishop’s pawn for 
the first move to arrange the game,  
according to Damiano
When giving a pawn advantage, the king’s bishop’s pawn is given because 
it is the pawn best suited to defend the attack against the king. As stated 
earlier when we addressed the quality and use of each pawn, it is easi-
er to fight on the kingside than on the queenside, because the kingside 
has fewer defenses than the queenside. Thus, because the king’s bishop’s 
pawn is the best of all of the pawns for defending the king, as well as for 
attacking and disrupting the enemy, it is traded in more often than any 
other pawn. But whether the player who gives a pawn advantage makes 
two moves or one, the player who receives it has less of an opportunity to 
attack. Therefore, the player giving [the pawn] can arrange the game well, 
as we have shown in the preceding games. But the player receiving the 
pawn still has a good advantage and, knowing how to play, can arrange 
the game more comfortably. We will address here how, according to Da-
miano, a player should arrange the game and break down the enemy.
If White gives said pawn and starts the game by moving the king’s pawn 
as far as it can go [1.e4], Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go 
[1...e5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2.Nf3], 
Black will move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2...f5].
If White took the opposing king’s pawn with his knight [3.Nxe5], Black 
would give check with the queen from the opposing rook’s fourth square 
[ 3 ...Q h 4+].
If White protects the king with the knight’s pawn [4.g3], Black will take 
the king’s pawn with his queen, giving check [4...Qxe4+].
If White protects the king with his queen [5.Qe2], Black will capture the 
rook with his queen [5...Qxh1].

 BooK IV                                                 251
If White were to give discovered check with the queen, moving the king’s 
knight to the opposing king’s knight’s third square [6.Ng6+], Black 
would protect the king, moving the bishop to the king’s second square 
[6...Be7].
If White took the rook with his knight [7.Nxh8], Black would move the 
queen to the fourth square of the opposing king [7...Qe4], exchanging 
the queen.34
The knight cannot move and is lost.35   In this way, Black will win the 
game.
Note. If at the beginning Black moves the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it 
can go, and White captures the king’s bishop’s pawn with the king’s pawn 
[3.exf5], and not the king’s pawn with the knight, Black will move the 
queen’s pawn as far as it could go [3...d5].
If White were to also take the king’s pawn with the knight [4.Nxe5], 
Black would play as before, giving check with the queen to the fourth 
square of the opposing rook [4...Qh4+] according to the aforementioned 
way.
If White protects the king with the knight’s pawn [5.g3], Black will cap-
ture the king’s pawn with the queen, giving check with the queen [5...
Qe5+] and threatening the rook.36
Note. If White does not give the aforementioned check in discovery 
[6.Ng6+], as we said, but instead gives check with the queen to the op-
posing rook’s fourth square [7.Qh5+], Black will move the king to the 
queen’s square [7...Kd8].37
34. After White captures the opposing queen with his queen [Qxe4], Black will capture 
the queen with his bishop’s pawn [fxe4].
35. White’s knight, after capturing the rook [Nxh8], is defenseless, because if the knight 
moves to [g6], the rook ’s pawn can capture it [hxg6], and its only other move is to the king’s 
bishop’s second square [f7], where the king can capture it [Kxf7].
36. The king is in check because White gave Black his king’s bishop’s pawn as an advan-
tage. Consequently, the king’s knight’s pawn protects the king from check.
37. L
ópez returns to move 6. White’s queen is on the king’s second square [e2] and the 
king’s knight is on the king’s fifth square [e5]. Here, White does not move the king’s knight 
to the opposing king’s bishop’s third square [g6]. His queen, instead, moves to [h4], where 
it gives check.

252 BooK IV
If White were to give another check with the knight from the second 
square of the king’s bishop [8.Nf7+], Black would move the king to his 
own second square [8...Ke7].
If White captures the rook with the aforementioned knight [9.Nxh8], 
Black will give check with the queen from the opposing king’s fourth 
square [9...Qe4+].
If White were to protect the king with his bishop [10.Be2], Black would 
capture the pawn that is on the fourth square of his bishop with the 
q ue e n   [10...Q x f 5].
Whether the two sides exchange queens or White does whatever he 
wants, he will lose the game, because his knight is trapped. In this way, 
Black will bring out his pieces and win the knight.
Note. If, when Black moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go, White 
does not capture the opposing king’s pawn with his knight, but instead 
moves the king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go to protect the other 
pawn [4.g4], Black moves the king’s pawn one square forward [4...e4], 
placing it in position to take the opposing knight.
The best move for White is to put the queen on the king’s second square 
[5.Qe2] so that Black cannot discover.38
Black will move his queen likewise to the king’s second square [5...Qe7] 
to remove the pin.
If White moves the knight to his queen’s fourth square [6.Nd4], which is 
the best move possible, Black will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far 
as it can go [6...c5], placing it in position to take the knight.
If White were to give check with the queen from the opposing queen’s 
knight’s fourth square [7.Qb5+], Black would move the king to the bish-
op’s second square [7...Kf7], making sure to be vigilant of the knight.
38. López is thinking ahead to the next move. After Black moves the queen to [e2], the 
king’s pawn is unpinned and can move. By doing so, Black discovers his queen.

 BooK IV                                                 253
White will need to protect his knight [8.Nb3], and Black will give check 
with the queen from the opposing rook’s fourth square [8...Qh4+], and 
then it would capture the knight’s pawn and the bishop’s pawn.39 In this 
way, White has lost.
Note. If, instead of giving check with the queen, White protected the 
knight, moving it to the opposing queen’s knight’s fourth square [7.Nb5], 
Black would move the queen’s pawn one square forward [7...d4], so that 
the queen’s knight cannot move where it is most useful.
If  White  moves  the  king’s  bishop  to  the  second  square  of  the  king’s  
knight [8.Bg2], which is a good move, Black will advance the queen’s 
rook’s pawn one square [8...a6], placing it in position to take the knight.
If  White  moves  the  king’s  knight  to  the  queen’s  rook’s  third  square  
[9.Na3], Black will move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square 
[ 9... Nf6].
If White were to advance the king’s knight’s pawn one square [10.g5], 
placing it in position to take the knight, Black would move the knight to 
the queen’s fourth square [10...Nd5].
If White captures the king’s pawn with the king’s bishop [11.Bxe4], Black 
will move the king’s knight to the fourth square of the opposing king’s 
bishop [11...Nf4], placing it in position to take the queen.
If White moves the queen to the third square of the king’s bishop [12.
Qf3], Black will capture the king’s bishop’s pawn with the queen’s bishop 
[1 2 ... Bx f 5].
If White took the knight with the queen [13.Qxf4], Black would take the 
opposing bishop with his bishop [13...Bxe4].
If White were to protect the rook and move it to the knight’s square [14.
Rg1], as playing it anywhere else, Black would give discovered check and 
win the rook. Black will give discovered check with his queen anyway, 
moving the bishop to the opposing queen’s third square [14...Bd3+].40
39. Black received the bishop’s pawn as an advantage before the game began.
40. The implied reply by White to 14...Bd3+ is 15.Kf2.

254 BooK IV
Black will give another check with the queen from the opposing king’s 
second square [15...Qe2+], and White will be able to move his king only 
to his knight’s third square [16.Kg3].
Black will move the queen to his king’s third square [16...Qe6].
If White took the bishop with the queen’s bishop’s pawn [17.cxd3], Black 
would pin the queen with the king’s bishop, moving it to the third square 
of his queen [17...Bd6].
If White does not take the bishop, but instead moves the queen to the 
fourth square of the king’s knight [17.Q g4] to exchange the queen, re-
gardless of where he plays, either it will be checkmate or White will lose 
the queen, because if he moves the king to the rook’s third square, Black 
will pin the queen with his queen’s bishop from the fourth square of the 
king’s bishop.
If, then, Black gives check with the king’s bishop from the queen’s third 
square [17...Bd6+], White will move the king to the rook’s fourth square 
[18.Kh4]. Black will move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the 
king’s bishop [18...Bf5], as we said, to capture the queen where White 
moved it to avoid getting it pinned. Black’s giving check with the king’s 
bishop to the queen’s third square [Bd6+] before moving the queen’s bish-
op, as we are saying—all of this Damiano addresses so poorly and con-
fusingly that players who know a great deal will understand little, and 
beginners, even less.41 But to continue, Damiano says if White moves the 
queen to the third square of the king’s bishop [19.Qf3], Black will move the 
rook to the king’s bishop’s square [19...Rf8]. If White moves the queen [20.
Q g3], Black will give check with his queen from the king’s fourth square 
[20...Qe4+], the result of which will be a quick checkmate [21. Kh5 Bg6].
Note. If White moves the queen to a square that defends the check from 
the opposing queen on the king’s fourth square, Black will move the 
king’s bishop to his king’s fourth square [Be4], so as to give check with 
the rook [Rf4+], and White cannot escape mate.
41. López notes in the margin: “Damiano confused.”

 BooK IV                                                 255
All of the aforementioned is Damiano’s doctrine, although in different 
words, and it can be found in chapter 4 of his booklet.42
chapter 7
Which addresses several of the chapter’s  
errors and the aforementioned method of playing, 
according to Damiano
In the previous chapter, I discussed eloquently the many ways in which 
Damiano misleads the player who gives a move for the king’s bishop’s 
pawn in chapter 4 of his booklet. I have not said, however, all that I could 
because only the most advanced players, particularly those who are able 
to see many moves ahead, would undersand. Although [Damiano’s mis-
takes] would not be a reason for me to spill my guts, as they say, and make 
my [objections] known to all—so that some, whoever they may be, think 
I’m nitpicking Damiano’s work, which, truly, I have not done—but only 
for me to warn players, both present and future, not to be deceived in 
their play by following such false and hopeless ways as Damiano’s to ar-
range their games. Setting aside this information and returning to the 
purpose of this chapter, I will mention some mistakes that it would not 
be right to conceal, and that any average player would notice. Since in this 
work I have woven together Damiano’s ways of playing with a desire to 
correct them for the common good of players, and since I passed over the 
mistakes that I will be discussing, so that it might seem to readers that I 
approved of this way of playing, they could blame me for it just as much 
as Damiano, if, as I say, I were to conceal things, without warning about 
them, that many people would notice immediately and condemn as bad.
Moving past all that, in Damiano’s last Note, where he says that if White 
were to advance the king’s knight’s pawn [10.g5], placing it in position to 
take the opposing knight, Black would move the knight to the queen’s 
42. López frequently refers to Damiano’s treatise as a librico or a librillo, two dimin-
utive terms that L
ópe
z may use to describe the physical size of Damiano’s book or his con-
tempt for it.

256 BooK IV
fourth square [10...Nd5], and that White can capture the opposing king’s 
pawn with the queen [11.Qxe4] or the bishop [11.Bxe4], although it is a 
much better move to take it with the queen, he has White capture it with 
the bishop, which is the worst move he can make, because if White were 
to take the pawn with his queen, Black would take the bishop’s pawn 
with  the  queen’s  bishop  [11...Bxf5].43 White would capture the queen 
with his queen [12.Qxe7+]. If Black takes the queen with his knight in 
order not to lose his queen [12...Nxe7], White will take the opposing 
queen’s knight’s pawn with his bishop [13.Bxb7], placing it in position to 
capture the rook.
In this way, White, who Damiano says was in a hopeless situation, will 
have won two pawns, and will have a good game and one more pawn than 
Black.
But suppose that the above is not played and that White took the pawn 
with the bishop [11.Bxe4], and not with the queen. When Black moved 
the knight to the opposing king’s bishop’s fourth square [11...Nf4], plac-
ing it in position to capture the queen, and White moved the queen to 
the third square [12.Qf3], Black took the pawn with the queen’s bishop 
[1 2 ... Bx f 5].44   He says White could take the knight with his queen [13.
Qxf4], as if it were, or appeared to be, a good move, when White could 
move the queen’s pawn one square, protecting his bishop, as well as dis-
covering the queen’s bishop against the opposing knight.
But let it be that White takes the knight with his queen: Black captures 
the bishop with his bishop [13...Bxe4], placing it in position to take the 
rook, then White moves the rook to the knight’s square [14.Rg1], and 
Black gives discovered check with his queen, moving the bishop to the 
third square of the opposing queen [14...Bd3+].
White moves his king to the bishop’s second square [15.Kf2], and Black 
gives check with his queen from the opposing king’s second square [15...
Q e 2+].
43. López notes in the margin: “Damiano’s first mistake.”
44. L
ópe
z notes in the margin: “Damiano’s second mistake.”

 BooK IV                                                 257
White moves his king to the knight’s third square [16.Kg3], and Black 
moves the queen to the king’s third square [16...Qe6] to cover the king.
White, to escape the pin, moves the queen to the fourth square of the 
king’s knight [17.Q g4]. Black gives check with the king’s bishop from the 
queen’s third square [17...Bd6+].
White moves the king to the rook’s fourth square [18.Kh4], and Black 
moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bishop [18...
Bf5], placing it in position to capture the opposing queen.
White moves the queen to the third square of the king’s bishop [19.Qf3], 
and Black moves the king’s rook to the bishop’s square [19...Rf8].
Here he makes another mistake.45 White removes the queen so as not 
to lose it, as if forgetting that the queen’s bishop is in front of the rook, 
and as if it were not better to move the queen’s pawn one square: in the 
first place, so that Black could not move to the fourth square of the op-
ponent’s king, with either the bishop or the queen; and in the second 
place, to create an opening for the queen’s bishop to defend against the 
rook ’s check from the fourth square of the king’s bishop; and finally, so 
that White would not need to remove the queen from the bishop’s third 
square, where it is now, for it is the best defender possible in this lost 
game, as Damiano shows.
Let’s suppose White is the better side, as it yields the advantage and 
makes the worst moves, allowing Black to make the best moves. And let’s 
give to Damiano that when Black moved the king’s rook to the bishop’s 
square, White fled with the queen in order not to lose it, as if by then 
there were a need to flee.
He says that when White flees, Black will give check with the queen from 
the fourth square of his king, which is clearly a mistake, because Black 
cannot give check from the fourth square of his king; but rather, from the 
opposing king’s fourth square.46
45. López notes in the margin: “Damiano’s third mistake.”
46. L
ópe
z notes in the margin: “Damiano’s fourth mistake.”

258 BooK IV
Damiano further says that White could move his queen, when it flees, to 
a square from which it could defend against the opposing queen’s check 
on the king’s fourth square, but he does not say where it moves, there be-
ing but two or three squares where the queen can go to defend against 
that check, namely the second square of the opposing queen’s knight, 
capturing the queen’s knight’s pawn [20.Qxb7]; the second square of its 
king’s knight; or the first square of his king’s rook.
But supposing White moved the queen to any of these squares, Damiano 
says that Black will move the king’s bishop to the king’s fourth square 
[20...Be5] so as to checkmate. This is another serious error, because mov-
ing the king’s bishop to the king’s fourth square neither harms White nor 
allows Black to give check with the rook that Damiano says.
So instead Black should move the queen’s bishop to the opposing king’s 
fourth square [20...Be4], attacking the opponent’s queen. Then, Black 
will be able to checkmate easily.
Therefore, from the many blunders and inaccuracies Damiano displays 
in this game, it is plainly evident that he must have set it up not with the 
chessboard in front of him or from memory, but rather, in his sleep.
In addition to which, at the beginning of this final way to play, Damiano 
says that Black could give check with the queen [4...Qh4+] when White 
captured the opposing king’s pawn with his knight, and that, blocking 
the check with the knight’s pawn [5.g3], Black would give another check 
with his queen, forking the rook by taking the king’s pawn, forgetting 
that the pawn is not there.

 BooK IV                                                 259
chapter 8
How the player who receives an advantage of the 
aforementioned pawn and the first move should 
arrange the game, according to Damiano
White giving the king’s bishop’s pawn and the move, Black will move the 
king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5].47
If White moves the queen’s pawn one square [2.d3], Black will move the 
queen’s pawn as far as it can go [2...d5].
If White moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [3.Nf3], 
Black will move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [3...Nc6].
If White moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [4.e4], Black will take 
the king’s pawn with the queen’s pawn [4...dxe4].
If White took the queen’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [5.dxe4], Black 
would exchange the queen [5...Qxd1+].
White would capture the queen with his king [6.Kxd1], rendering the 
king unable to leap now.
Black would move the king’s bishop to the queen’s third square [6...Bd6].
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [7.c3], Black will 
move the king’s knight to the king’s second square [7...Nge7].
If  White  moves  the  king  to  the  second  square  of  the  queen’s  bishop  
[8.Kc2], Black will move the king’s knight to the knight’s third square 
[8... Ng 6].
If White moves the queen’s bishop to the king’s third square [9.Be3], 
Black will move the king to his second square [9...Ke7].
47. The stronger player gives an advantage to the weaker player. Black moves first, and 
White plays without his king’s bishop’s pawn. Today, the player who gives an advantage 
chooses to play Black because White, by convention, moves first. Since, in L
ópez’s game, 
White has surrendered his first move, the algebraic notation will reflect this by passing over 
White’s first move, starting with Black (1...), and then continuing with White’s “second” 
move (2.d3)—White’s first actual move of the game.

260 BooK IV
If White moves the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [10.
Nbd2], Black will move the queen’s bishop to the king’s third square [10...
B e6].
If White moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [11.Bb5], placing it in position to capture the knight, Black 
will move this knight to the queen’s square [11...Nd8].
If White moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square forward [12.c4], 
Black will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [12...c6] so that he 
can retreat the king’s bishop one square when White advances the pawn.
White will be better off first retreating his bishop to the fourth square of 
the queen’s rook [13.Ba4].
Black would put the queen’s knight to the second square of the king’s 
bishop [13...Nf7].48
If White advances the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [14.c5] to capture 
the opponent’s bishop, Black will put his bishop on the second square of 
the queen’s bishop [14...Bc7].
If White were to move the pawn of the queen’s knight as far as it can 
go [15.b4], seeking a pawn break, Black would advance the queen’s rook’s 
pawn one square [15...a6].
If White breaks on the other side of the board, moving the king’s rook’s 
pawn as far as it can go [16.h4], Black would stop it by first moving the 
rook’s pawn as far as it can go [16...h5].
If White moves the king’s bishop to the queen’s knight’s third square [17.
Bb3], Black will move the queen’s knight to the king’s rook’s third square 
[17...Nh6], allowing White to capture his queen’s knight [18.Bxh6]. If 
White captures it with his queen’s bishop so that Black cannot move his 
knight to the fourth square of the opposing king’s knight, Black will take 
the bishop with his rook [18...R xh6].
48.  López  notes  in  the  margin:  “Damiano’s  mistake,  as  the  king’s  bishop’s  pawn  
occupies this square.”

 BooK IV                                                 261
If White were to take the other king’s bishop with his king’s bishop [19.
Bxe6], Black would capture the king’s bishop with his king [19...Kxe6].
Black will move the knight until it can be placed on the king’s third 
square [20...Ne6].
If White were to create space by moving the king’s knight’s pawn [21.g4], 
Black would capture the king’s knight’s pawn with his rook’s pawn [21...
h x g4].
If White wanted to double the rooks [20.Rhg1; 23.Rag1] in order to take 
the king’s knight’s pawn [22.R xg4], Black would move the queen’s rook 
to the king’s knight’s square [22...Rg8], putting said aforementioned 
knight’s pawn on the knight’s third square [23...g6] and the knight on 
his own king’s bishop’s fourth square to protect the knight’s pawn. [This 
is a] mistake by Damiano, because the square is not the knight’s own 
fourth square, but the opponent’s. Black will remove the queen’s rook to 
the king’s bishop’s square [24...Rf8], separating himself from the bishop’s 
pawn.49
If White took the bishop’s pawn with the king’s pawn [26.exf5], Black 
would take the king’s pawn with the knight’s pawn [26...gxf5],50 and will 
have two pawns that can move and become queens.
If White were to give check with the rook, Black would protect his king 
with the rook,51 and White cannot do Black any harm.
Note. White could defend in another way, as follows:
49. López does not state how White moves after 23...g6 and 24...Rf8. One possibility, 
as Laborde notes, is 24.a3 and 25.Nc4 (L
ópe
z de Segura, Livre de l ’ invention liberale et art 
du jeu d’echecs, 4 18).
50. Since L
ópe
z does not write that Black makes the 25.f5 move, a pawn does not occu-
py f5, and therefore, neither move is possible.
51. Jorge Amador observes: “L
ópez notes that this check is not possible (there is a pawn 
on e5, blocking the check, and, in addition, the king is on e6, not e7, so Black ’s rook cannot 
block a check by moving to e6). Or maybe L
ópe
z still thinks that the g1-rook can move to 
g6—recall that he doubled rooks on what seemed to be a closed file, and so the check he’s 
talking about is from g6” ( J. Amador, personal communication, September 23, 2018).

262 BooK IV
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go, White will move his 
king’s pawn only one square [2.e3], because if he advanced it more, White 
would lose the game quickly.
If Black moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [2...d5], White will 
move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [3.d4].
If Black took the queen’s pawn with the king’s pawn [3...exd4], White 
would take the king’s pawn with his queen [4.Qxd4]. Black would win a 
move by moving the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [4...c5], and 
White would have a badly arranged game.
But  if  White  took  the  queen’s  bishop’s  pawn  with  his  king’s  pawn  
[4.exd4], Black would give check with the queen from the fourth square 
of the opposing king’s rook [4...Qh4+].
Black would exchange the queen by force by giving White another check 
with the same queen from the opposing king’s fourth square [5...Qe4+]. 
In order not to lose the rook, White will protect the king with his queen 
[6.Q e 2] .52
All of the aforementioned information is Damiano’s teaching in chapter 
5 of his booklet, although he expresses it in many confusing words. But 
leaving aside many things I could say about the aforementioned way to 
play, I will only warn the players that, in addition to Damiano’s confusing 
and foolish way of playing, and his offering the player many moves with-
out saying which to play, the defender has the advantage. Damiano also 
says other things that any player will readily see if he picks up the chapter 
and plays through the game as given by Damiano. In addition, Damiano 
says a lot of nonsense, as the following example illustrates: Black on the 
attack moves the queen’s knight to the king’s bishop’s second square, but 
it is occupied by the bishop’s pawn, of which he says nothing until the end 
of that way of playing.53
52. The implied reply by White to Black’s Qh4+ is g3.
53. L
ópe
z notes in the margin: “Damiano’s first mistake in this game.”

 BooK IV                                                 263
Later on, near the end of this way of playing, he says that Black moves the 
knight to the king’s bishop’s fourth square to protect this same knight’s 
pawn.54 This presupposes having moved the knight to the same knight’s 
third square, which is a glaring error because the knight where it is can-
not move to the king’s bishop’s fourth square, nor from here could it pro-
tect the pawn that is on the same knight’s third square. So he should have 
said, “from the opposing king’s bishop’s fourth square.”55
Damiano also says that after White exchanges his king’s bishop for the 
opponent’s queen’s bishop, which is on his king’s third square, White can 
give check with his rook from the opposing king’s knight’s second square, 
and Black can block with his rook from the bishop’s second square. These 
moves are impossible in view of the capture of the opposing bishop on 
the same king’s third square. If Damiano wants people to believe that the 
bishops were exchanged without either player making any moves, it is be-
cause he does not spell it out. He writes so much other nonsense in this 
game that he seems to have dictated it in his sleep.
chapter 9
How the player who receives an advantage  
of a knight for the aforementioned pawn and the first 
move should defend, according to Damiano
In chapters 6 and 7 of his booklet, Damiano describes three ways that 
the player who receives a knight for the king’s bishop’s pawn and a move 
can defend. I will discuss them here, so that players can understand them 
better.
For example, White receives the knight for a pawn and a move.56
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the king’s pawn one square [2.e3].
54. López notes in the margin: “Damiano’s second mistake.”
55. López notes in the margin: “Damiano’s third mistake.”
56. The reader who wishes to follow the moves Lópe
z discusses in this chapter should 
remove Black ’s queen’s knight and White’s king’s bishop’s pawn from the board.

264 BooK IV
If Black moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [2...d5], White will 
move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [3.d4].
If Black captures the queen’s pawn with his king’s pawn [3...exd4], White 
will take the king’s pawn with his king’s pawn [4.exd4].
If Black gives check with the queen from the fourth square of the oppos-
ing rook [4...Qh4+], White will protect the king with the knight’s pawn 
[5 . g 3].
If Black gives another check with the queen from the king’s fourth square 
[5...Qe4+], White will protect his king with the queen [6.Qe2] and ex-
change it by force because it is pinned.
Note. If Black were not to capture the queen’s pawn with the king’s pawn, 
but advanced the king’s pawn one square [3...e4], White would create 
space for other pieces to move by moving the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far 
as it can go [4.c4].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4...c6], White will 
take the queen’s pawn with the bishop’s pawn [5.cxd5].
If  Black  took  the  queen’s  pawn  with  his  queen’s  bishop’s  pawn  [5...
cxd5], White would move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square 
[6. Nc 3] .
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the queen’s third square [6...Bd6], 
White will capture the queen’s pawn with his knight [7.Nxd5].
If Black were to give check with the queen from the fourth square of the 
opposing king’s rook [7...Qh4+], White would not protect his king with 
the knight’s pawn, because he would have a bad game. Instead, White 
would move the king to the queen’s second square [8.Kd2].
If Black were to take the opposing king’s pawn’s rook with the king’s 
bishop [8...Bxh2], White would give check with the knight from the sec-
ond square of the opposing queen’s bishop [9.Nc7+], forking the rook.
If Black took the knight with his bishop [9...Bxc7], White would take the 
queen with the king’s rook [10.R xh4].

 BooK IV                                                265
Note. If, when White moved the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third 
square, Black did not move the king’s bishop to the queen’s third square, 
but instead moved the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [6...Nf6] 
or the queen’s bishop to the king’s third square [6...Be6] to protect the 
queen’s pawn, White would give check with the king’s bishop from the 
fourth square of the opposing queen’s knight [7.Bb5+].
If Black were to protect the king with the queen’s bishop [7...Bd7], White 
would move the queen to the rook’s fourth square [8.Qa4], where he will 
sacrifice his queen to capture the opponent’s queen or lose the queen’s 
pawn.
If Black does not protect his king with the queen’s bishop, but moves the 
king to his own second square [7...Ke7], White will move the queen’s 
knight’s pawn one square [8.b3]. And Black will have arranged his game 
bad ly.
If Black did move the queen to his rook’s fourth square [8...Qa5] to de-
fend against check from the opposing queen’s bishop from the rook’s 
third  square,  White  would  give  this  check  with  the  queen’s  bishop  
[ 9. B a3+].
Black would move the king [9...Ke6], and White would exchange the op-
posing king’s bishop [10.Bxf8]. Black’s king would be out in the open. But 
if Black moved the queen to his rook’s fourth square to defend against 
the aforementioned check, White would move the queen’s bishop to the 
queen’s second square [9.Bd2]. If Black were not to move his queen away, 
White would give check with the knight and capture the queen.57
Regardless, after removing the queen, Black will have a bad game.
Note. If Black were to move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], 
White would move the queen’s pawn one square [2.d3].
If Black were to move the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2...f5], 
White would move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [3.e4].
57. The progression of the queen’s knight’s moves is as follows: b1 to c3; c3 to d5; and d5 
to c7. The knight can fork the queen [a5] and the king [e8].

266 BooK IV
If Black takes the king’s pawn with the bishop’s pawn [3...fxe4], White 
will give check with the queen from the fourth square of the opposing 
k i ng ’s ro ok [4 .Qh5+].
If Black were to protect his king with the knight’s pawn [4...g6], White 
would capture the king’s pawn with the queen, saying check [5.Qxe5+].
Black would block with the queen [5...Qe7], and White can take either 
the opposing rook [Qxh8] or the king’s bishop’s pawn from his own 
king’s fourth square [6.Qxe4] and exchange the queen, which is better 
than capturing the rook, because then Black would win the game.
All of the aforementioned is Damiano’s teaching from chapter 6, and the 
last above from the beginning of chapter 7. These words advise players 
who arrange their game this way that White, who has an extra knight, 
should not take the king’s rook [6.Qxh8], but instead capture the other 
pawn [Qxe4], exchanging the queen, because if White took the king’s 
rook, it would lose the game.
I do not know, however, why Damiano said these words. If he said them 
because those who know little should be content with winning anything 
and not try to test their skill against someone who knows more, let him 
say these words when he wins the other way and the level of skill is sus-
pect, like we said in the general warnings. If he said them, however, not to 
continue with the game because it is very tiring, with so many different 
precepts and moves, as he has shown, let him, who professes to be a teach-
er but tires so quickly, tell such clearly refined and elegant ways to arrange 
the game, as we said above, and we will discuss the remaining ways,
But if Damiano said it because he believed it was correct and conclusive 
that if White took the rook he would lose the game, it would behoove the 
teacher to say how or to give some advice to help [players] to understand 
and to develop the skill, and not to leave it obscure and poorly reasoned; 
because he [the player] should understand, especially with respect to a 
subject like this one, which has been completely demonstrated, that it 
was not on the authority of Damiano’s word alone that the teacher omit-
ted the explanation.

 BooK IV                                                267
Because if I fear the discovered check, which Black could give by cap-
turing the queen’s pawn with his own [6...exd3+], it does not help Black 
greatly in winning the game from White. And if he said it because he 
thought that if White took the rook it would lose the queen, this, or 
some move by which one could come to understand, should be shown. 
The player should capture the rook whenever possible, unless he believes 
this move would harm his game in any way. Otherwise, the player with 
the knight advantage, why should he avoid taking it, not seeing such an 
evident danger? Because when he risked losing the queen for two other 
pieces, coming out with four pieces for the queen, or even three, is closer 
to winning the game than to losing it.
But if White knows how to play, I do not believe it has lost the game, but, 
instead, won it. It is my opinion that if the game developed according to 
what Damiano says, and White would capture the rook with the queen 
[6.Qxh8], because if Black moves the knight to the bishop’s third square 
[6...Nf6] to imprison the queen, which is the only way to prevent the 
queen’s escape, White will move the queen’s bishop to the third square of 
the opposing king’s rook [7.Bh6], thus by force exchanging the queen and 
the bishop for the opposing queen and bishop.58
Else, Black will lose the game, because if it captures the opposing queen’s 
pawn with the pawn of his king’s bishop, which is on the opposing king’s 
fourth square, giving discovered check with his queen [7...exd3+], White, 
if it prefers not to move the king, can block with the king’s bishop from 
his king’s second square [8.Be2].
In this way, White will be safe and without fear and, exchanging all of 
the above, will be ahead by a rook.
But if Black, before moving the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square, 
first gave the aforementioned discovered check, taking the queen’s pawn 
58. Black’s queen is on [e7], and his bishop is on [f1]; White’s queen is on [h8], and his 
bishop is on [h6]. If Black moves his queen to [g7], White will capture it with his queen 
[Qxg7]. Then, Black will capture the queen with his bishop [Bxg7], and White will capture 
the bishop with his bishop [Bxg7].

268 BooK IV
with his own pawn, as said, White, if he wishes, could still protect his 
king with the bishop like we said, continuing as above.
If White does not want to lose the bishop by covering the king [8.Be2] 
when Black takes the pawn [6...exd3+], giving discovered check with his 
queen, White can move the king to the queen’s square [7.Kd1].
If Black took the opposing queen’s bishop’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn, 
giving check again [7...dxc2+], White would take the bishop’s pawn with 
his king [8.Kxc2]; and if Black were to give check with the queen from 
the opposing king’s fourth square [8...Qe4+], White, if he wants, could 
return his king to the queen’s square.
Or White could protect his king with the king’s bishop from the queen’s 
third square [9.Bd3], placing it in position to take the opposing queen, 
and if Black captures the opposing king’s pawn’s knight with his queen 
[9...Qxg2+], giving check, White would protect his king with the king’s 
knight [10.Ne2]. If Black were to take the rook with his queen [10...
Qxh1], White would capture the opposing king’s knight with his queen 
[11.Qxg8].
If Black were to take the opposing king’s pawn’s rook with his queen 
[11...Qxh2]—to protect the rook’s pawn and so that White cannot move 
the queen’s bishop to the third square of the opposing king’s rook [Bh6] 
against the king’s bishop, which is pinned—White will take the opposing 
king’s pawn’s knight with the king’s bishop, giving check [12.Bxg6+]. Af-
ter Black takes the king’s bishop with the rook’s pawn [12...hxg6], White 
takes the rook’s pawn with his queen, giving check [13.Qxg6+], and Black 
moves his king to the queen’s square [13...Kd8], White will give check 
with the queen’s bishop from the fourth square of the opposing king’s 
knight [14.Bg5+]. When Black blocks with his bishop [14...Be7], White 
will give mate with the queen on the opposing king’s knight’s square [15.
Q g 8 #].
If the game were not played this way, Black, whatever it does, will lose the 
game if White knows how to play. Damiano need no longer be afraid that 
White will lose.

 BooK IV                                                269
chapter 10
Another way the player who receives  
an advantage of a knight for the king’s bishop’s pawn 
and the first move should defend,  
according to Damiano
In chapter 7 of his booklet, Damiano presents a third way to defend for 
the player who has the advantage of a knight for the king’s bishop’s pawn 
and the move, thus:
Black will move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5].
White will move the queen’s pawn one square [2.d3].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [2.d5], White will move 
the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [3.Nf3].
If Black were to advance the king’s pawn [3...e4], placing it in position 
to capture the knight, it will not be a good move, because White would 
take the king’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [4.dxe4] and, after Black cap-
tured the queen’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [4...dxe4], White would 
exchange the queen [5.Qxd8+], and after Black captured the queen with 
his king [5...Kxd8], White would move the king’s knight to the fourth 
square of the opposing king’s knight [6.Ng5] to take the king’s pawn.
If Black protected the king’s pawn with whatever it wanted, White would 
give check with the knight from the second square of the opposing king’s 
bishop, forking the rook.
Note. If Black did not advance the king’s pawn as stated earlier, but in-
stead were to move the king’s bishop to the queen’s third square [3.Bd6], 
White would move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [4.e4] so that the 
opposing king’s pawn could no longer attack the knight.
If Black were to move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4...c6], 
White would move the pawn of his queen’s bishop as far as it can go 
[5.c4] so that Black cannot keep those two pawns, that is, the king’s pawn 
and the queen’s pawn, together.

270 BooK IV
If Black were to advance the queen’s pawn [5.d4]—which is better than 
exchanging it, because if it were exchanged, Black would be left with a 
badly arranged game and one less knight—if Black were to advance the 
pawn, White would move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the 
opposing king’s knight [6.Bg5], placing it in position to take the queen.
If Black moved the king’s bishop’s pawn one square [6...f6], placing it in 
position to capture the opposing bishop, White would retreat the bishop 
to his rook’s fourth square [7.Bh4].
If Black moves the king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [7...g5], placing 
it in position to take the bishop, White would put [the bishop] on the 
third square of his king’s knight [8.Bg3].
If Black breaks with the king’s bishop’s pawn, moving it one square for-
ward [8...f5], White will take it with his king’s pawn [9.exf5].
If Black were to take the king’s pawn with the queen’s bishop [9...Bxf5], 
White would move the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square [10.
Nd2] and then move it to his king’s fourth square [Ne4], never allowing 
the king’s pawn to advance.
In this way, White will have a well-arranged game, and this defense is 
not bad. Up to this point, the words are Damiano’s, although his are ex-
pressed differently and not as clearly. It is still worthwhile, however, to 
inform players on the defending side.
Note. In these last words of Damiano’s defense and doctrine, which say 
that White should move the queen’s knight to the queen’s second square 
and then move it to his king’s fourth square, so that the opposing king’s 
pawn cannot advance, it seems to me that Damiano was careless, or else, 
when playing the game from memory, he forgot that it was better to move 
the queen to the king’s second square [10.Qe2], against the opposing 
king’s pawn, before moving the aforementioned knight, because in this 
way the player has three pieces [queen, knight, and bishop] attacking the 
opposing king’s pawn.

 BooK IV                                                 271
If Black, in order to avoid losing the king’s pawn, or the queen’s pawn by 
virtue of the pin, moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the 
opposing king’s knight [10...Bg4], placing it in position to take the afore-
mentioned knight, White will not take the opposing king’s pawn with 
his bishop [11.Bxe5], because Black would then capture the knight with 
his queen’s bishop [11...Bxf3], placing it in position to take the queen. If 
White captures the queen’s bishop with his knight’s pawn [12.gxf3], Black 
will give check with his queen from the fourth square of the queen’s rook 
[12...Qa5+], winning the bishop.
Consequently, White will not capture the aforementioned pawn with the 
queen’s bishop, but will move the queen’s knight to the queen’s second 
square, which is a very good move and a timely one, because it defends his 
king from the aforementioned check and protects the knight, such that 
he will win the opposing pawn or the whole game.
White, if he knows how to play, will in this way leave Black more lost and 
wrecked than he would were he to play the way Damiano gives.
chapter 11
How the player who receives an advantage  
of a knight for the first move should play, according  
to Damiano’s doctrine
In chapter 8 of his booklet, Damiano presents a way to play for the player 
who is given knight advantage, as follows.
For example, Black, having given a knight for the move, plays the king’s 
pawn as far as it can go [1...e5].59
White will move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [2.e4].
If Black moves the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [2...Nf6], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing king’s pawn, White will 
59. Black gives White his queen’s knight in exchange for the first move.

272 BooK IV
move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [3.Nc3], protecting 
the pawn.
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3...Bc5], White will move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of 
the queen’s bishop [4.Bc4].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4...c6], White will 
move the king’s bishop to the third square of the queen’s knight’s [5.Bb3].
If Black breaks with his queen’s pawn, pushing it as far as it can go [5...
d5], White would move the queen’s pawn one square [6.d3].
If Black took the opposing king’s pawn with the queen’s pawn [6...dxe4], 
White would capture the queen’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [7.dxe4], 
and it will not make further trades with the king’s pawn.
But if Black does not take the king’s pawn with his queen’s pawn, but, 
first, moves the king’s rook’s pawn one square [6...h6] so that White can-
not pin the knight with his queen’s bishop [Bg5], White will move the 
king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [7.Nf3], placing it in position to 
capture the opposing king’s pawn.
If Black moves the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
king’s knight [7...Bg4], placing it in position to take the knight, White 
will move the rook’s pawn one square [8.h3], attacking Black’s bishop.
If Black moves the queen’s bishop to the rook’s fourth square [8...Bh5], 
White will move the king’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [9.g4], and 
will win the king’s pawn.
If Black gives the king’s knight for two pawns in order to maintain the 
pin on White’s knight [9...Nxg4; 10.hxg4 Bxg4], White will move the 
king’s rook to the knight’s square [11.Rg1], placing it in position to take 
the bishop.
If Black were to protect the bishop with the rook’s pawn [11...h5], it would 
lose the queen’s pawn and thus the game.

 BooK IV                                                 273
The aforementioned is Damiano’s teaching, albeit confusing and badly 
arranged but clarified for the benefit of players. If one were to look at Da-
miano’s booklet, the confusion and bad organization would be evident to 
those who wish to learn how to play.
Note. In this last game that Damiano composed, he was no more careful 
to avoid mistakes than in previous games. Indeed, as I will discuss, he is 
more deserving of blame for these mistakes in the initial moves for both 
defender and attacker, for when Black moved the queen’s pawn as far as it 
could go to break against the enemy, and White, as advised by Damiano, 
moved the queen’s pawn one square, this was not a good move, because 
White was losing one of his best pawns: after Black captures the king’s 
pawn with the queen’s pawn [6...dxe4] and White takes the queen’s pawn 
with his queen’s pawn [7.dxe4], as Damiano says, Black will capture the 
queen with his queen, giving check [7...Qxd1+].
If White takes the queen with his king [8.Kxd1], Black will capture the op-
posing king’s bishop’s pawn with his king’s bishop [8...Bxf2]. Black will not 
be able to leap.60 I say this because Damiano values highly the king’s ability 
to leap even after the queens are exchanged, as can be observed in chapter 
5 of his booklet. I have stated this above, in the game and chapter that I 
wrote on his teaching, dealing with the advantage of a pawn and a move.
If White, so that his king can still leap, should take the opposing queen 
with the queen’s knight [8.Nxd1], Black will capture the king’s pawn 
with the king’s knight [8...Nxe4]. So there are two mistakes: The first by 
White on defense, playing so badly that he loses one of his best pawns; 
and the other by Black on offense, in not capturing the pawn. Damiano 
gives no reason for this; everything seems to be done from memory, but 
he forgets what he plays.
Damiano concludes his games here. There are eleven, all told, distribut-
ed across eight chapters: three starting with the king’s pawn; one with 
the queen’s pawn; another for the player who is given pawn advantage for 
the move; two are about how the player receiving pawn and move should 
60. White, not Black, is not able to execute the king’s leap.

274 BooK IV
play; three are about how the player who is given knight for pawn and 
move advantage ought to defend; and one is about how the player who is 
given knight for move advantage should defend.
But how good these are and the benefit they bring to players, each and ev-
ery one can consider it and judge best with the aid of my discussion of the 
errors therein as I have put forth. Setting aside all of the aforementioned, 
as well as a lot that could be said about these games and Damiano’s teach-
ings, some players, whether they have an advantage or not, will not wish 
to arrange their games so openly to the incursions of more knowledgeable 
players, fearing that they might easily go astray and lose if they are not 
well informed about the ways to play. While they are learning them well, 
I present below one way in which they can defend such that the enemy 
will not be able to attack easily.
chapter 12
Another way the player who receives  
an advantage of a knight for the first move  
can arrange the game
Black, giving a knight advantage, moves first the king’s pawn as far as it 
can go [1...e5], and White will move the king’s pawn one square [2.e3].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [2...d5], White will 
move the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [3.d4].
If Black captures the queen’s pawn with his king’s pawn [3...exd4], the 
way will remain closed for White to attack the opposing king’s bishop’s 
pawn with his king’s bishop. This attack thus ruled out, White will be 
able to arrange comfortably, because the enemy will not be able to bother 
White much with his moves, as the main avenue of attack is closed off.
So long as White keeps that queen’s pawn where it is, that road will re-
main closed; but if Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can 
go [4...c5], White, not having the queen’s knight in position, will capture 
the queen’s bishop’s pawn for two reasons: first, White will be safe from 

 BooK IV                                                 275
attack by Black if it arranges itself as I will describe; and second, to put 
Black into disarray by isolating his pawn.61
But before taking the bishop’s pawn with his queen’s pawn, he will give 
check with the king’s bishop from the fourth square of the opposing 
que en’s k n i g ht [5 . Bb5+].
If Black protects his king with the queen’s bishop [5...Bd7], White will 
move his queen to his king’s second square, giving check again [6.Qe2+].
If Black protects his king with the king’s bishop [6...Be7], White will 
capture the queen’s bishop’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [7.dxc5].
If Black were to give check with the queen from the rook’s fourth square 
[7...Qa5+], White will protect his king with the queen’s knight from the 
bishop’s third square [8.Nc3], protecting the king’s bishop.
If Black were to advance the queen’s pawn one square [8...d4], placing it 
in position to capture the queen’s knight, which protects the king, White 
will capture the opposing queen’s bishop with his king’s bishop, giving 
check [9.Bxd7+].
If Black takes the opposing king’s bishop with his king [9...Kxd7], White 
will give check with his queen from the fourth square of the king’s knight 
[10.Q g4+].
In this way, White will have won the opposing queen’s pawn and the 
game.
If White does not want to do this, it can give check from the fourth 
square of the opposing queen’s knight [10.Qb5+], exchanging the queens 
by force [10...Qxb5]. White will take the opposing queen with his knight 
[11.Nxb5], attacking the opposing queen’s pawn.
If Black were to take the opposing queen’s pawn, which is on the fourth 
square of the queen’s bishop, with his king’s bishop [11...Bxc5], protecting 
the queen’s pawn, White would move the king’s knight to the bishop’s 
third square [12.Nf3], winning the pawn by force.
61. White captures the queen’s bishop’s pawn on his seventh move.

276 BooK IV
Or, if White does not want to play this, due to the check that Black may 
give with his rook [12...Re8+], then instead of moving the king’s knight, 
as stated, White will leap his king to the queen’s third square [13.Kd3].
If Black moves the queen’s rook to his king’s square [12...Re8] with the in-
tention of moving it to the opponent’s king’s square to hinder him, then 
White will move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [13.Nf3] 
and next capture the queen’s pawn with the queen’s knight.
Then White will seek to strengthen his position, moving the queen’s bish-
op to the king’s third square and the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square.
If, in the meantime, Black does not make a move that requires attention, 
he will be defeated.
If, at the beginning, when White moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can 
go [3.d4], Black does not take but instead advances the king’s pawn an-
other square [3...e4], White will move the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as 
it can go [4.c4], breaking up his enemy.
If Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4...c6], White will 
capture the queen’s pawn with the queen’s bishop’s pawn [5.cxd5], and if 
Black takes the queen’s bishop’s pawn with the pawn of his queen’s bishop 
[5...cxd5], White will give check with the king’s bishop from the fourth 
square of the opposing queen’s knight [6.Bb5+].
If Black protects his king with the queen’s bishop [6...Bd7] so as not to 
move the king, White will move his queen to the rook’s fourth square 
[7.Qa4] to protect his bishop, as well as to exchange the queen and the 
bishop for the opposing queen and bishop.62
In this way, White will be left with a strong game, and, with the most 
troublesome pieces exchanged, he will remain a knight ahead. White, 
knowing how to play, will win the game this way.
If Black, in order to avoid these exchanges, moves the king’s knight to 
the bishop’s third square [7...Nf6], White will move the queen’s knight to 
62. 7...Bxb5 8.Qb5+ Qd7 9.Qxd7+ Kxd7.

 BooK IV                                                277
the bishop’s third square [8.Nc3]. In this way, either the aforementioned 
exchanges will take place or Black will lose the queen’s pawn.
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the queen’s third square [8...Bd6], 
White will not capture the bishop and then the queen’s pawn with his 
queen’s knight, because Black would give him a bad game, taking the 
bishop with his knight [9...Nxd7] and then moving the queen to the 
fourth square of the king’s knight, placing it in position to capture the 
knight and the opposing king’s pawn’s knight, to win the pawn and the 
rook as well.63
Therefore, when Black moves the king’s bishop to the queen’s third square 
[8...Bd6], White will move the king’s knight to the king’s second square 
[9.Ne2].
In this way, White will be able safely to capture the bishop [10.Bxd7+] 
and the pawn [11.Nxd5], because if Black now moves the queen to the 
fourth square of the king’s knight [11...Q g5], as stated, White will move 
the queen’s knight to the fourth square of his king’s bishop [12.Ndf4], 
protecting the king’s knight’s pawn and protected by the king’s knight.64
In this way, White will win the game by force because his enemy will not 
be able to attack. This is enough for this way of playing.
chapter 13
Another way the player who receives  
an advantage of a knight for the first move  
can arrange the game
In addition to the aforementioned game, the player who is given knight 
advantage for the first move can arrange the game the way I discuss be-
low. The opponent does not have the queen’s knight.
63. If White captures the queen’s pawn with his queen’s knight [Nxd5], Black will cap-
ture the queen’s knight with the king’s knight [Nxd5].
64. After [10.Bxd7+], Black moves [10...Nxd7].

278 BooK IV
If Black moves the king’s pawn as far as it can go [1...e5], White will move 
the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [2.d4] to disturb his enemy.
If  Black  were  to  advance  the  king’s  pawn  one  square  [2...e4],  White  
would move the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [3.c4].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [3...c6], White will 
move the queen’s bishop to the fourth square of the king’s bishop [4.Bf4].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [4...d5], White will 
move the king’s pawn one square [5.e3], creating an opening for the king’s 
bishop.
In this way, White will have freed all of his pieces and will easily be able 
to attack the enemy.
If Black, when White moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can go [2.d4], 
were to take the queen’s pawn with his king’s pawn [2...exd4], with the 
idea of gaining a move, White would capture with his queen [3.Qxd4].
If Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [3...c5], placing 
it in position to take the opposing queen, White will give check with the 
queen from the opposing king’s fourth square [4.Qe5+].
If  Black  blocked  with  the  queen  [4...Qe7],  White  would  capture  it  
[5.Qxe7+]; the queens having been exchanged [5...Bxe7], White can ar-
range his game well on the attack against the enemy, keeping an extra 
piece.
If Black does not block with his queen, whichever piece does the block-
ing, he will lose either the queen’s bishop’s pawn [5.Qxc5] if the king’s 
knight blocks or the king’s knight’s pawn [5.Qxg7] if the bishop blocks.
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will win the game more easily.
But if Black, instead of moving the queen’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can 
go against the opposing queen, moves the queen’s pawn as far as it can 
go [3...d5], White will move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [4.e4] to 
break down the enemy.

 BooK IV                                                279
If Black took the king’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [4...dxe4], White 
would take it with his queen, giving check [5.Qxe4+].
If White preferred to exchange queens or to break down the enemy in-
stead, it would not move the king’s pawn as far as it can go, but, rather, 
the queen’s bishop’s pawn [4.c4].
If Black took the queen’s bishop’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [4...dxc4], 
White could take the queen’s pawn, or else the queen [5.Qxd8+], giving 
check.
If Black were to take the opposing queen with his king [5...Kxd8], White 
would move the king’s pawn as far as it can go [6.e4], discovering the 
king’s bishop against the opposing queen’s pawn.
If Black moves the queen’s knight’s pawn as far as it can go [6...b5] to pro-
tect the queen’s pawn, White will move the queen’s rook’s pawn as far as 
it can go [7.a4].
If  Black  does  not  capture  the  queen’s  rook’s  pawn  with  his  queen’s  
knight’s pawn, so as not to ruin his position, and instead moves the 
queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [4...c6], White will take the queen’s 
knight’s pawn with his rook’s pawn [5.axb5].
If Black takes the opposing rook’s pawn with his bishop’s pawn [5...cxb5], 
White will move the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [6.Nc3].
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will win the game. My advice 
would be not to arrange the game this way so as not to give the enemy 
(assuming he is more knowledgeable, because, after all, White is giving 
knight advantage to Black) an opportunity win the game. Instead, as I 
said before, he [White] would move the king’s pawn as far as it can go 
[4.e4] to wreck the enemy’s position. This is enough to say about this way 
of playing.

280 BooK IV
chapter 14
Another way the player who receives  
an advantage of a knight for the first move can 
arrange the game
If Black, giving king’s knight advantage, moved the king’s pawn as far 
as it can go [1...e5], White would move the king’s pawn as far as it can go 
[2 . e4].65
If Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [2...c6], setting up a 
break, White will himself break by moving the queen’s pawn as far as it 
can go [3.d4].
If Black captures the opposing queen’s pawn with his king’s pawn [3...
exd4], White will take the king’s pawn with his queen [4.Qxd4], because 
there is nothing with which to attack her.
If Black moves the queen’s bishop’s pawn another square [4...c5], placing 
it in position to take the opposing queen [d4] and to open up a square 
for the knight, White will give check with the queen from the opposing 
king’s fourth square [5.Qe5+].
In this way, the queens can be exchanged, or, if Black blocks with the 
king’s bishop [5...Be7], White will capture the king’s knight’s pawn with 
his queen [6.Qxg7], placing it in position to take the rook and preventing 
Black from castling.
This way, White, knowing how to play, will win easily.
But if, instead of moving the queen’s bishop’s pawn, Black moved the 
king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bishop [2...Bc5], White 
would move the queen’s bishop’s pawn one square [3.c3].
If Black moves the queen’s knight to the bishop’s third square [3...Nc6], 
White will move the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the opposing 
queen’s knight [4.Bb5], placing it in position to take this knight.
65. Black gives his king’s knight to White in exchange for the first move.

 BooK IV                                                 281
If Black moves the king’s rook to the bishop’s square [4...Rf8], White will 
move the king’s knight to his bishop’s third square [5.Nf3].
If Black moves the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [5...f5], White 
will move the queen’s pawn one square [6.d3].
If Black moves the queen’s pawn one square [6...d6], White will take the 
opposing king’s bishop’s pawn with the king’s pawn [7.exf5].
If Black took the opposing king’s pawn with his queen’s bishop [7...Bxf5], 
White would move the queen’s bishop to the king’s third square [8.Be3] 
to exchange it for the opposing king’s bishop.
In this way, White, knowing how to play, will defeat Black by removing 
the pieces that could frustrate White.
chapter 15
Another way the player who receives  
an advantage of a knight for the first move  
can arrange the game
Black, having given king’s knight advantage, and moving the king’s pawn 
as far as it can go [1...e5], White will make the same move [2.e4].
If Black moves the king’s bishop’s pawn as far as it can go [2...f5], White 
will capture the king’s bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn [3.exf5].
If Black moves the king’s bishop to the fourth square of the queen’s bish-
op [3...Bc5] in order to vacate the bishop’s square for the king, and White 
wishes to give check with the queen, first he would move the king’s bishop’s 
pawn as far as it can go [4.f4] to break up the enemy and to play the game 
we discussed in the chapter on games without advantages, White is able 
to attack much better in this game, as he is much better placed to go on 
the offensive, because the other side lacks the knight that was so useful in 
defending and in driving away the opposing queen from that place where it 
can attack so much, giving check from the opposing rook’s fourth square.66
66. López discusses games without advantages throughout book 2.

282 BooK IV
So if the game went this way, in order not to dwell on it further, I refer 
players to that aforementioned chapter.
And if Black neither takes the bishop’s pawn with his king’s pawn, nor 
the opposing king’s knight with his bishop [Bxg1], but instead moves 
the queen’s pawn one square [4...d6] to protect his king’s pawn, discov-
ering the queen’s bishop on the opposing king’s pawn, White will give 
check with the queen from the fourth square of the opposing king’s rook 
[ 5 .Q h5+].
If Black moves the king to his bishop’s square [5...Kf8], White will cap-
ture the king’s pawn with the bishop’s pawn [6.fxe5].
If Black takes the bishop’s pawn with his queen’s pawn [6...dxe5], White 
will move the king’s knight to the bishop’s third square [7.Nf3].
If Black moves his queen to the third square of the king’s bishop [7...Qf6], 
placing it in position to capture the opposing pawn, White will move the 
king’s bishop to the fourth square of his queen’s bishop [8.Bc4].
If Black took the opposing king’s pawn with the queen’s bishop [8...Bxf5], 
White would move the king’s rook to the bishop’s square [9.Rf1].
If Black moves the king’s knight’s pawn one square [9...g6], attacking the 
opposing queen and protecting his bishop, White will give check with his 
queen from the third square of the opposing king’s rook [10.Qh6+].
If Black protects the king with his queen from the second square of the 
king’s knight [10...Q g7], White will advance the queen’s pawn as far as 
it can go [11.d4] against the opposing bishop and allowing the bishop to 
protect his queen.
If Black took the bishop’s pawn with his king’s bishop [11...Bxd4], White 
would  take  it  with  his  knight  [12.Nxd4]  and  then  move  the  king’s  
knight’s pawn as far as it can go, placing it in position to capture the op-
posing queen’s bishop, winning it because it is pinned.
If Black takes the queen’s pawn, not with the bishop but rather with the 
king’s pawn, which is on the king’s fourth square [11...exd4], White will 

 BooK IV                                                283
move the king’s knight to his rook’s fourth square [12.Nh4], placing it in 
a position to capture the opposing queen’s bishop.
In this way, White will throw Black’s position into disarray and win the 
game.
If, when White gave check with the queen from the rook’s third square, 
as we said, Black did not block, but moved the king to his square [10...
Ke8], White would move the king’s knight to his rook’s fourth square [11.
Nh4], placing it in position to capture the opposing queen’s bishop.
If Black moves the king’s bishop to its own square [11...Bf8], believing 
that it has won the queen [h6], White will capture the queen’s bishop 
with the rook [12.R xf5], winning it.
If Black captures the rook with the pawn [12...gxf5], it loses the queen; 
and if Black takes the rook with his queen [12...Qxf5], White will capture 
it with his knight [13.Nxf5].
If Black captures the opposing queen with his bishop [13...Bxh6], White 
will take the bishop with his knight [14.Nxh6].
In this way, White will have won two bishops for a rook, in addition to 
the knight it has received as an advantage. White will be left with five 
pieces and the opponent with three. Black is hopelessly lost.
If Black, instead of moving the king’s bishop to his own square, moved 
the rook there [11...Rf8], White would move the king’s knight’s pawn as 
far as it can go [12.g4], placing it in position to capture the opposing bish-
op.
And if Black moves the king’s bishop to the king’s second square [12...
Be7], White will capture the bishop with his knight [13.Nxf5] and, after 
exchanging queens, will have won a pawn.
But if Black does not move the bishop, but instead moves his queen to 
the bishop’s third square [12...Qc6], White will take the bishop with his 
p aw n   [13 . g x f 5].

284 BooK IV
Black will have lost, as it cannot harm his enemy, even if it were to give 
check with his queen or do what it might.
*End of the Game of Chess*
Printed
in Alcalá de Henares, at the house of Andrés de Angulo
in the Year 1561

 285
bibl
io
Gr
aphy
biblioGraphy
Adams, Jenny. Power Play: The Literature and Politics of Chess in the Late Middle 
Ages. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2006.
Aristotle. “Magnorum Moralium I.” Opera: 3: Aristoteles latine interpretibus variis. 
Berlin: Apud Georgium Reimerum, 1831.
———
  . Economics. Translated by G. C. Armstrong. Cambridge: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1935.
———
  . 
Aristotle’s Poetics. Translated by Benjamin Jowett. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1908.
Bächtold, W. “Macrobius: Comentarius ex Cicerone in Somnium Scipionis.” In 
Dream Interpretation: Ancient and Modern, by C. G. Jung, edited by John Peck, 
Lorenz Jung, and Maria Meyer-Glass. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 2016.
Battles, Ford Lewis, trans. Calvin’s Commentary on Seneca’s De Clementia. Leiden: 
Bril l, 1969.
Borges, Jorge Luis. “Chess.” Translated by Alastair Reid. In A Personal Anthology, 
edited by Anthony Kerrigan, 75–76. New York: Grove Press, 1967.
Cassiodorus. The Letters of Cassiodorus. Edited by Thomas Hodgkin. London: 
Henry Frowde, 1886.
———
 . C
assiodorus: Institutions of Divine and Secular Learning and On the Soul. 
Translated by James W. Halporn and Mark Vessey. Liverpool: Liverpool Univer-
sity Press, 2004.
The Catholic Study Bible. Edited by Donald Senior. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2010.
Caxton, William. The Game and the Playe of Chesse. Edited by Jenny Adams. Ka-
lamazoo, Mich.: Medieval Institute Publications, 2009.
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote. Translated by Edith Grossman. New York: 
HarperCollins, 2003.
Cessolis, Jacob de. The Book of Chess. Translated and edited by H. L. Williams. New 
York: Italica Press, 2008.
Cicero, Marcus Tullius. The Orations of Marcus Tullius Cicero. Translated by C. D. 
Yonge. London: George Bell and Sons, 1903.
———
 . R
hetorica ad Herranium. Translated by Harry Caplan. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1954.
The Codex of Justinian: A New Annotated Translation, with Parallel Latin and 
G r e e k   Te x t. Edited by Bruce W. Frier. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2016.
Covarrubias Orozco, Sebastián de. Tesoro de la lengua castellana, o española. Ma-
drid: Melchor Sánchez, 1674.
Cuartero, María Pilar, and Francisco Javier Mateu. “Presencia de exempla afortuna-
dos en el De ludo scachorum de Jacobo de Cessolis.” In Aragón en la Edad Media. 

286 BIBlIoGrapHy
Estudios de Economía y Sociedad, vol. 14-15, 357–73. Zaragoza: Universidad de 
Zaragoza, Facultad de Filosofia y Letras, Departamento de Historia Medieval, 
1999.
Dahlberg, Leif. Spacing Law and Politics: The Constitution and Representation of the 
Juridical. New York: Routledge, 2016.
Eales, Richard. Chess: The History of a Game. Edinburgh: Hardinge Simpole, 2002.
Fl
órez, Enrique. España sagrada. Vol. 2. Edited by Rafael Lazcano. Madrid: Editori-
al Revista Agustiana, 2001.
Folger, Robert. Writing as Poaching: Interpellation and Self-Fashioning in Colonial 
Relaciones de Mérito y Servicios. Leiden: Brill, 2011.
G
ómez Gómez, Juan María. “Rui López de Segura contra el Brocense.” Cuadernos 
de Filología Clásica. Estudios Latinos 25, no. 1 (2005): 141–55.
Gómez Redondo, Fernando. “El ajedrez y la literatura (34). Libro de la invención 
liberal y arte del juego del axedrez de Ruy López de Segura.” Rinconete. Centro 
Virtual Cervantes. January 14, 2015. https://cvc.cervantes.es/el_rinconete/anteri-
ores/enero_15/14012015_01.htm.
Greenberg, Henry J. The Anti-War Wargame: A Comprehensive Analysis of the 
Origins of the Game of Chess. Bloomington, Ind.: iUniverse, 2015.
Gregory the Great. The Book of Pastoral Rule. Edited by Rev. James Barmby. Lon-
don: Aeterna Press, 2016.
Griffin, Clive. Journeymen Printers, Heresy, and the Inquisition in Sixteenth- 
Century Spain. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Horace. Satires, Epistles and Ars poetica. Edited by H. Rushton Fairclough. London: 
W. Heinemann, 1926.
John of Salisbury. Policratus. Translated by Cary J. Nederman. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1990.
Juel, Kristin. “Defeating the Devil at Chess: A Struggle between Virtue and Vice 
in Le Jeu des esches de la dame moralisé.” Chapter 4 in Chess in the Middle Ages 
and Early Modern Age: A Fundamental Thought, edited by Daniel E. O’Sullivan. 
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2012.
Justinian. The Digest of Justinian. Translated by Alan Watson. Philadelphia: Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania Press, 1985.
———
 . Th
e Civil Law. Translated by S. P. Scott. New York: AMS Press, 1973.
Kant, Immanuel. The Philosophy of Law. Edited by Samuel Parsons Scott. Clark, 
N.J.: The Lawbook Exchange, 2001.
Linder, Isaak and Vladimir. José Raúl Capablanca: Third World Chess Champion. 
Milford, Conn.: Russell Enterprises, 2010.
L
ópez de Segura, Ruy. Livre de l’ invention liberale et art du jeu d’echecs. Edited and 
translated by Stéphane Laborde. Morrisville, N.C.: Lulu Books, 2015.
Martial. The Epigrams of Martial. Edited by Henry George Bohn. London: G. Bell 
and Sons, 1871.
———
 . Th
e Complete Works of Martial. East Sussex: Delphi Publishing, 2014.
Mulgan, Geoff. Good and Bad Power: The Ideals and Betrayals of Government. 
London: Allen Lane, 2006.
Murray, H. J. R. A History of Chess. 1913. Reprint, New York: Skyhorse Publishing, 
2012.

 BIBlIoGrapHy                                          287
Pandolfini, Bruce. Pandolfini’s Ultimate Guide to Chess. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 2003.
Plato. Plato in Twelve Volumes. Vol. 3. Translated by W. R. M. Lamb. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967.
Protomártir Vaquero, Santos. “Una glosa de Gallardo al Brocense.” Revista de Estu-
dios Extremeños 72, no. 3 (2016): 1595–1602.
Sallust. Sallust. Translated by John Carew Rolfe. London: W. Heinemann, 1921.
Schaforth, Colleen. The Art of Chess. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 2002.
Schiesaro, Alessandro. The Passions in Play: Thyestes and the Dynamics of Senecan 
Drama. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Scott, Helen. “Case Comment: Killing and Causing Death in Roman Law.” Law 
Quarterly Review 129 (2013): 101–22.
Seneca. Controversiae. Translated by Michael Winterbottom. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1999.
Shenk, David. The Immortal Game: Or How 32 Carved Pieces on a Board Illumi-
nated Our Understanding of War, Art, Science, and the Human Brain. Toronto: 
Doubleday Canada, 2011.
Sobrer, Josep Miquel. “The English Translation of Scachs d’amor.” http://www.
scachsdamor.org/. Accessed September 21, 2019.
Soltis, Andrew. “Tools of the Trade .
 . .” Chess Life, July 1995, 14–15.
Tracy, James D. Emperor Charles V, Impresario of War. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2002.
Twiss, Richard. Chess, Volume I. London: G. G. J and J. Robinson, and T. and 
J. Egerton, 1787.
Vegetius. Vegetius: Epitome of Military Science. Translated by N. P. Milner. Liver-
pool: Liverpool University Press, 2001.
Virgil. The Aeneid of Virgil: A Verse Translation. Translated by Allen Mandelbaum. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982.
Waisman, Sergio Gabriel. Borges and Translation: The Irreverence of the Periphery. 
Lewisburg, Penn.: Bucknell University Press, 2005.
Walker, George. Chess & Chess-Players: Consisting of Original Stories and Sketches 
by George Walker. London: Charles J. Skeet, 1850.
Wallerand, G. Les œuvres de Siger de Courtrai. Louvain: Institut supérieur de 
philosophie de l’Université, 1913.
Wilkinson, L. P. Ovid Recalled. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Winter, Edward. Chess Facts and Fables. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 2006.
Yalom, Marilyn. Birth of the Chess Queen. New York: HarperCollins, 2004.



 289
index
index
Adams, Jenny, 3
advantage, 9, 65, 89, 90, 92, 101–6, 109–10, 
114–16, 125, 135, 173, 188, 194, 229, 237, 
241, 243, 245–47, 250, 251n36, 253n39, 257, 
259, 263, 267, 269, 271, 273–74, 277, 279, 
280–81, 283
Alcalá de Henares, 15n2, 284
Alexander the Great, 23n3, 32
Alfonso V of Portugal, 5
Alfonso X el Sabio, 2
Amazons, 50, 75
Amel-Marduk, 32, 33, 74
Angulo, Andrés de, 15, 284
Aragon, 5, 7
Aranjuez, 17
Ariosto, Ludovico, 76
Aristotle, 23, 27, 28, 46, 48, 56, 59, 81; Ars 
Rhetorica, 56; Ethicas, 27, 81; Magnorum 
moralium, 23; Metaphysica, 81; Oeconom-
icorum, 48; Politica, 28, 59; Politicorum, 
46; Problemata, 81; Rethoricorum, 81
Atalanta, 76
Athens, 47, 69
Atys, 30
Babylon, 32–33, 36–37
Bernardino Caldogno, Francisco, 10–11; “De 
ludo scachorum,” 11
bishop, xv, xvi, 4n14, 5, 8n23, 11, 16, 40, 
45–47, 49, 51–57, 61, 65–66, 69–70, 
76, 79, 81–86, 91, 95–100, 104, 113n179, 
119–73, 177–237, 241–83
Bishop’s Gambit, 154n19
Boethius, 25–27; De consolatione philosophi-
ae, 26, 27n16; De disciplina scholarium, 25
Boi, Paolo, 8–9 
Book of Wisdom, 42
Borges, Jorge Luis, 11; “Pierre Menard Au-
thor of the Quixote,” 11
Calepino, 30–31, 39
Capablanca, José Raúl, 11
Cassiodorus, 19, 28, 42–43, 45, 52, 58–59, 
105–7, 110; De anima, 45; Varia epistolae, 
19, 28, 42–43, 52, 58–59, 105
Castellví i de Vic, Francí de, 6
Castile, 7–8, 15–16, 31, 62, 80, 104
castling, 45, 65, 128, 214, 225, 280
Cato, 72
Center Counter Game. See Scandinavian 
Defense
Cerón, Alfonso de, 9
Cervantes, Miguel de, 4, 11–12, 15
Cessolis, Jacobus de, 10, 31, 36–37, 41, 51, 53, 
58–59, 67, 74–75, 81; Liber de moribus 
hominum et officiis nobilium super ludo 
scacchorum, 3, 31n34, 41n56
Charles, eldest son of Philip II, 13, 15, 17 
Charles I, king of Spain, 16n4
check, 3n6, 7, 44, 46, 54, 57, 60–62, 65, 
78–79, 98, 104, 109–11, 119–32, 134–36, 
138, 140–44, 146–47, 149–50. 152–53, 
156–57, 159–73, 178–80, 182, 185, 187, 
189–91, 193–200, 202–3, 205–9, 211, 
217–19, 224–25, 229–32, 234–35, 242–46, 
248–54, 256–58, 261–66, 268–69, 271, 
273, 275, 276, 278–84. See also discovered 
check; double check
checkmate, xviii, 6, 59–60, 78–80, 97–101, 
104, 110–12, 123, 130, 135, 157, 169, 191, 
193–200, 206, 208, 213, 223, 235,  
254, 258
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, 18–19, 24–25, 43, 52, 
63, 106, 114; De inventione, 52, 114n182; 
De naturum deorum, 24; De Officiis, 
52, 106; Oratio in L. Catilinam Prima, 
18–19; Rhetorica ad Herennium, 25, 
88n159, 114n182; Timaeus, 63; Tu s c u l a n a e   
disputationes, 18
Columella, 72 

290 IndeX
Curtius Rufus, Quintus, 89, 95; Historiae 
Alexandri Magni, 89, 95
Cutri, Giovanni Leonardo da, 8–9
Cyrus, king of the Persians, 49
Damiano, Pedro, xv–xix, 9–10, 30, 45n77, 
62–63, 76, 92, 110, 116, 173–74, 177, 
179–82, 185–94, 200–204, 209–10, 
214, 217, 221, 223, 230–33, 250, 254–59, 
260n48, 261–63, 266–74; Questo libro e 
da imparare giocare a scachi et de li partii, 
x v, 30n28
Damiano Defense, xvi, 4n14 
Damiano’s Gambit Game, 192, 200
Damião, Pedro. See Damiano, Pedro
Darius, king of Persia, 50
discovered attack. See discovery
discovered check, 129, 148, 150, 161, 169, 177, 
191, 194–96, 198, 251, 253, 256, 267–68
discovery, 78, 79, 122, 251
Don Quixote, 4n13, 11–12
double check, 78–79, 191, 195–96
doubled pawns, 187, 214
doubled rooks, 159, 261n51
Eales, Richard, 5
Ecclesiasticus, 36, 42, 47, 51–52
en passant, 62n127, 146n14, 148n17,  
196, 248
Facetus, 28 
Fenollar, Bernat, 6–7
Filelfo, Francesco, 31
fork, 124n6, 144n13, 167n22, 178, 242, 258, 
264, 265n57, 269
From’s Gambit, xv
Gorschen, Fritz C., 5
Göttingen manuscript, 5 
Greece, 69
Gregory the Great, pope, St., 43; Regula 
Pastoralis, 43 
Gutmayer, Franz, xvii
Harpalyce, 76
Hippocrates, 69
Horace, 19, 107, 114; Ars poetica, 19, 114
Hugh of Saint Victor, 24; Didascalicon de 
studio legendi, 24n4
Ibn Ezrah, Abraham, 2
Isabella I, queen of Castile, 5, 7, 104n68
Isidore of Seville, St., 31n34, 35, 52; Chronica 
maiora, 31n34; Sinonima soliloquies, 35, 52
Italy, xvi, 3, 8–10, 30, 31n33, 45, 61–62, 80, 
96–101, 110, 146, 192
Jeconiah, 32
John of Salisbury, 44; Policraticus, 44
John of Wales, 2; Quaedam moralitas de 
scaccario, 2–3
Justinian I, emperor, 18n14; Corpus juris civi-
lis, 18n14, 29n24, 48n87, 92n162; Digesta, 
18n14, 29n24, 45, 48n87, 52, 60, 61n126, 
92n162; Institutiones, 18n14, 48n87, 
92n162; Lex authentica, 48–49; Novellae 
constitutiones, 18n14, 48, 92n162
Keres Attack, xv
king, xvi, 1–3, 5, 8n23, 11n31, 37, 40–67, 69, 
71, 74–86, 91–92, 92–104, 109–11, 115, 
119–73, 177–237, 241–83
King’s Gambit Declined, 169n23
king’s leap, 121n1, 125, 128n5, 151n18, 184n5, 
214n21, 273n60
knight, xvi, 11, 40, 45–47, 50, 53–58, 61, 
65–66, 71, 76–77, 79, 82–86, 95–104, 
119–73, 177–237, 241–46, 248–83
Linder, Isaak, 11
L
óp
ez, Ruy: Libro de la invencion liberal 
y arte del juego de axedrez, xvi–xvii, 9, 
10n25, 11, 12n34; Ruy L
óp
ez Opening, xv, 
xviii–xix, 4n14, 5, 11, 203
Lucena, Luis Ramírez de, xv, 4–5, 10, 44n73; 
Repetición de amores y arte de ajedrez con 
150 juegos de partido, xv, 4–5
Luke, St., 58
Lydus, 30
Macrobius, 23–24, 35, 37, 92; Somnium 
Scipionis, 23–24

 IndeX                                                   291
Martial, 27, 30n26, 31, 40–41, 75; Epigrams, 
27, 31, 40–41, 75
Martin of Braga, St., 29n23; De formula 
honestae vitae, 29n23
Matthew of Vendôme (Matheus Vindocin-
ensis), 114
Max Lange Attack, xv
Moors, 8, 25, 30, 50, 54, 75, 104n168    
Murray, H. J. R., 2–3, 4n11, 5, 7n19, 8n23, 10, 
12n35, 36n47, 44n73, 62n129
Nebrija, Antonio de, 48; Quinquagena, 48
Nebuchadnezzer II, 32
Ovid, 27–28, 34, 40–41, 73, 75; Epistulae ex 
Ponto, 28
Palamedes, 30, 32, 50
Palladio, Andrea, 72 
passar bataglia, 62, 146
Paul, St., 47; Epistola ad Corinthios, 47
pawn, xvi–xviii, 4n14, 6–7, 11, 33, 38, 41, 
44–46, 49, 51, 53–57, 59–74, 78–80, 
82–84, 86, 89–97, 99–103, 105, 108–12, 
113n179, 115, 119–73, 177–237, 241–83. See 
also doubled pawns 
Persia, 1, 20n21, 49–50, 75, 95; Persians, 49
Petrov, Alexander, xviii; Petrov Defense, 
xviii, 4, 177
Philidor, François-André, xvii; Philidor 
Defense, 4
Philip II, king of Spain, 8–9, 13, 15, 16n4, 
17n9
Philo of Alexandria, 42
Philometor, 31
pinned, 133, 161, 199, 209, 254, 264, 268, 282; 
unpinned, 133, 252n38
Pius IV, pope, 8, 190 
Plato, 47, 63n130; Meno, 47
Pliny, 35, 72, 91; Naturalis Historia, 35
Ponziani Opening, xv, 4n14 
Portugal, 5, 31, 62, 80, 100, 110
queen, xv, xvi, 4–7, 11–12, 33, 40–41,  
45–56, 58–61, 64–66, 68–73, 75–77, 
79–86, 91, 95–97, 99–101, 104, 112, 
113n179, 115, 119–73, 177–87, 189–237, 
241–54, 256–84
Queen’s Gambit, 4, 11 
Quintilian, 20, 25, 34, 59; Declamationes, 20, 
34, 59; Instituto oratoria, 20n19, 25n10
Réti, Richard, xvii
Rome, xv, xvi, 9, 26n13, 28n21, 32, 190
rook, xvi–xvi, xviii, 3, 4n14, 8n23, 41, 45, 
49, 53–59, 61, 65n133, 66, 71–73, 76–80, 
82–86, 97–101, 103–4, 110, 119–26, 
128–30, 132, 134–57, 159–73, 178–79, 182, 
184, 186–87, 189–91, 193–200, 205–8, 
212, 214–16, 219, 222, 224–35, 242–46, 
248–54, 256–58, 260–69, 271–72, 275–77, 
279–83. See also doubled rooks
Russian Game. See Petrov Defense
Sallust, 24, 43, 49, 52
“Scachs d’amor,” 6
Scaevola, 29
Scandinavian Defense, 173n26
Scipio Africanus, 107
Seneca, 26, 28–29, 34–35, 87, 105–6; Contro-
versiae, 34n40; De Ira, 87; De tranquil-
itate animi, 28; Epistulae morales ad 
Lucillium, 26, 36, 105–6; Thyestes, 42
Servius Honoratus, Maurus, 30–31; In tria 
Virgillii opera expositio, 31n31
Shenk, David, 1, 2n4, 4
Solomon, 43–44, 51, 59
Spain, 2, 6–10, 12, 13, 15n2, 16n4–5, 20n19, 
26n13, 45, 50, 54, 62n128, 71, 73, 80, 
96n165, 97–101, 104n168, 110, 192
stalemate, 78–80, 96–101
Terence, 26
Toledo Osorio, García de, 13, 15
Trojan War, 32
Troy, 30, 32, 50
Tyrrhenus, 30
Valencia, University of, 6
Valerius Maximus, 20, 29,69,107; Amore et 
dilectione, 20; Sapienter dicta aut facta, 
107

292 IndeX
Varro, 72 
Vázquez de Molina, Juan, 17
Vegetius, 25, 35, 37–38, 63, 66, 74, 77, 87–91, 
93–96, 100, 115
Vinosalvo, Gaufridus de, 26; Poetria nova, 
26n12
Vinyoles, Narcís, 6
Virgil, 30, 31n31, 39, 49–50, 72; Aeneid, 
39n53, 49, 50n94
Waisman, Sergio Gabriel, 11
Xenophon, 49
Xerxes, 20, 31–33, 35, 36n48, 39, 41, 50, 58, 
63, 95
Yalom, Marilyn, 7, 104n168
Zafra, 8, 15–16, 113

Th  e Art of the Game of Chess was designed in Garamond Premier 
with Quadraat Sans and composed by Kachergis Book Design 
of Pittsboro, North Carolina. It was printed on 60-pound 
House Natural Smooth and bound by Sheridan Books of 
Chelsea, Michigan.